
CULTURE AND COGNITION  
Paul DiMaggio  
Department of Sociology, 2-N-2 Green Hall, Princeton University, Princeton,  
New Jersey 08544; e-mail: dimaggio@phoenix.princeton.edu  
KEY WORDS: sociology of culture, social classification, social cognition, schemata  
ABSTRACT  
Recent work in cognitive psychology and social cognition bears heavily on con- 
cerns of sociologists of culture. Cognitive research confirms views of culture as  
fragmented; clarifies the roles of institutions and agency; and illuminates supra- 
individual aspects of culture. Individuals experience culture as disparate bits of  
information and as schematic structures that organize that information. Culture  
carried by institutions, networks, and social movements diffuses, activates, and  
selects among available schemata. Implications for the study of identity, collective  
memory, social classification, and logics of action are developed.  
INTRODUCTION  
The study of culture in everyday life remains a virtuoso affair. Interpretive  
studies offer great insight but fail to build on one another. Cultural theory has  
become highly sophisticated but not fully operational. These riches ready the  
field for takeoff, like the study of social stratification in Sorokin's day (1957  
[1927]). But before the study of lived culture can become a cumulative enter- 
prise, scholars must clarify the cognitive presuppositions behind their theories  
of what culture does and what people do with it, and the fundamental concepts  
and units of analysis (Jepperson & Swidler 1994, Wuthnow 1987).  
Recent work in cognitive psychology and social cognition provides resources  
for both tasks. After describing recent convergence between cultural sociol- 
ogy and psychology, this chapter considers lessons of recent work on cognition  
for presuppositions about the nature of culture; develops implications of these  
lessons for sociological work on identity, collective memory, social classifi- 
cation, logics of action, and framing; and points to key problems that remain  
unsolved. 

Rather than offer an exhaustive review of cognitive sociology per se (see  
Zerubavel 1997) or work in psychology relevant to culture (see D' Andrade  
1995), I emphasize tensions and affinities between recent cognitive research  
and work in the sociology of culture with the aim of bringing the former into the  
service of the latter. I focus on how people use culture, rather than the production  
of culture, ideology, or culture embedded in the physical environment. The  
point is not to psychologize the study of culture, but to lay a foundation for a  
view of culture as working through the interaction of shared cognitive structures  
and supra-individual cultural phenomena (material culture, media messages, or  
conversation, for example) that activate those structures to varying degrees.  
SOCIOLOGY AND PSYCHOLOGY: POINTS  
OF CONVERGENCE  
A handful of sociologists have appreciated the potential of cognitive science  
to inform sociological work on culture (Carley 1989, Cicourel1973, Schwartz  
1981, White 1992), and some social constructionists have anticipated impor- 
tant results of cognitive research (Berger & Luckman 1967, Garfinkel 1987  
[1967], Zerubavel 1991). For the most part, however, sociologists of culture  
have ignored relevant work by cognitive psychologists, social psychologists,  
and public-opinion researchers. This omission reflects a mismatch between  
the modal intellectual styles of humanistic, interpretively oriented cultural so- 
ciologists and experimentally oriented positivistic psychologists, as well as the  
disappointing legacy of Parsons' efforts at disciplinary fusion, which psychol- 
ogized culture, reducing it to shared values, norms, and attitudes.  
Sociology: More Complex Views of Culture  
In recent years, however, common ground between sociology of culture and  
psychology has grown. The major development within sociology has been  
a shift to a more complex understanding of culture. Thirty years ago, most  
sociologists viewed culture as a "seamless web" (Swidler 1997), unitary and  
internally coherent across groups and situations. In effect, culture was por- 
trayed as a latent variable influencing in common such manifestations as media  
images, responses to attitude questionnaires, and the values embodied in ev- 
eryday practices. Individuals were presumed to acquire culture in the course of  
socialization and, in the popular oversocialized view (Wrong 1961), to enact it  
unproblematically. It followed from this perspective that there was little reason  
to worry about constructs used to study culture, for any kind of "cultural stuff"  
could serve as an indicator of the underlying latent variable.  
By contrast, recent work depicts culture as fragmented across groups and  
inconsistent across its manifestations (Martin 1992). The view of culture as 
values that suffuse other aspects of belief, intention, and collective life has  
succumbed to one of culture as complex rule-like structures that constitute  
resources that can be put to strategic use (Bourdieu 1990, Sewell1992, Swidler  
1986).  
This shift makes studying culture much more complicated. Once we ac- 
knowledge that culture is inconsistent-that people's norms may deviate from  
what the media represent as normal, or that our preconscious images and dis- 
cursive accounts of a phenomenon may differ-it becomes crucial to identify  
units of cultural analysis and to focus attention upon the relations among them.  
In effect, our measures stop being indicators of a latent variable (culture), and  
their relationship to culture becomes analogous to that of education, income,  
and place of residence to social stratification: separate phenomena, analytically  
related to a common theoretical construct, the relations among them a matter for  
empirical investigation (D' Andrade 1995 notes similar trends in anthropology).  
Similarly, once we acknowledge that people behave as if they use culture  
strategically, it follows that the cultures into which people are socialized leave  
much opportunity for choice and variation. Thus our attention turns to ways in  
which differing cultural frames or understandings may be situationally cued.  
Addressing such issues requires more elaborate and contestable psychological  
presuppositions than did the culture-as-latent-variable view.  
Psychology: More Complex Views of Cognition  
Such questions make it sensible for sociologists of culture to turn to psychology  
for insight into the mechanisms through which shared culture enters into cog- 
nition. Yet nothing guarantees that psychologists, who have their own research  
agendas, can help us. Thirty years ago, behaviorism made psychology essen- 
tially irrelevant to the study of culture. Twenty years ago, psychologists casting  
off the yoke of behaviorism focused primarily on the acquisition of skills and  
capacities of little interest to most sociologists of culture. Even a dozen years  
ago, the implications for cultural sociology of many of the ideas and research  
traditions that are most useful today were still unclear.  
What has happened to make psychology useful to sociologists of culture?  
First, psychologists have rejected behaviorism, accepted and demonstrated the  
existence of mental structures used to perceive, process, and retrieve informa- 
tion, and found ways to make inferences about such structures. Second, just  
as sociological research has demonstrated culture's complexity and fragmenta- 
tion, psychological research has demonstrated the complexity of memory and  
provided glimpses of the partitioning of mental structures by domain. Third,  
recent foci of psychological research (schemata, categories, mental models,  
and so on) are much richer in cultural content than the formal operations or in- 
tellectual capacities that once preoccupied cognitivists and developmentalists 
(Rogoff & Chavajay 1995). Fourth, some psychologists have taken notice of  
such sociological topics as cross-cultural differences in cognition (Shweder &  
Bourne 1991, Markus & Kitayama 1991), elite/popular interaction in cultural  
change (Moscovici 1984), and "distributed cognition" (i.e. the social division  
of cognitive labor) (Resnick et al1991, Salomon 1993).  
In addition to expanding the grounds of shared interest between the two dis- 
ciplines, such developments have also softened two important epistemological  
differences. Whereas most sociologists of culture have been steadfastly an- 
tireductionist, resisting efforts to portray culture as the aggregate of individual  
subjectivities, psychology has focused upon the individual. Increasingly, how- 
ever, as I shall argue, psychological research bolsters and clarifies the view of  
culture as supra-individual, and even addresses supra-individual aspects of cog- 
nition directly [as in work on pluralistic ignorance (Miller & Prentice 1994)].  
Second, some sociologists of culture rejected the subjectivist focus of psy- 
chological research, calling instead for research on external aspects of culture  
amenable to direct measurement (Wuthnow 1987). In recent years, cognitivists  
have developed ingenious empirical techniques (reviewed in D' Andrade 1995)  
that permit strong inferences about mental structures, going far toward closing  
the observability gap between external and subjective aspects of culture.  
Of course, the fit between the disciplines must not be exaggerated. Most  
of what psychologists do is irrelevant to sociologists of culture, and much  
of the culture sociologists' study is supra-individual. Common ground has in- 
creased but will remain limited by the different subject matters of the disciplines  
(Zerubavel 1997), which will remain complements rather than substitutes.  
COGNITIVE PRESUPPOSITIONS  
OF CULTURAL SOCIOLOGY  
Sociologists who write about the ways that culture enters into everyday life  
necessarily make assumptions about cognitive processes. If we assume that a  
shared symbol evokes a sense of common identity (Warner 1959), that a certain  
frame provokes people to think about a social issue in a new way (Gamson  
1992), that lessons about the structure of space and time learned in school are  
generalized to the workplace (Willis 1977), or that surveys can measure class  
consciousness (see Fantasia's critique 1995), we are then making powerful cog- 
nitive assumptions. Such assumptions, while metatheoretical to sociologists,  
are keenly empirical from the standpoint of cognitive psychology. It is cru- 
cial, then, to evaluate our assumptions (or adjudicate differences among them)  
by microtranslating presuppositions (Collins 1981) to the cognitive level and  
assessing their consistency with results of empirical research on cognition. 
Coherence vs Fragmentation  
Many sociologists have come to reject the latent-variable view of culture as  
coherent, integrated, and ambiguous in favor of representations of culture as a  
"toolkit" (Swidler 1986) or "repertoire" (Tilly 1992): a collection of stuff that  
is heterogeneous in content and function. Yet much empirical work on culture  
still presumes that culture is organized around national societies or cohesive  
subnational groupings, is highly thematized, and is manifested in similar ways  
across many domains (Hofstede 1980, Bourdieu 1984).  
Is culture a latent variable-a tight network of a few abstract central themes  
and their more concrete entailments, all instantiated to various degrees in a  
range of symbols, rituals, and practices? If so, then we would expect to find  
that group members share a limited number of consistent elements-beliefs,  
attitudes, typifications, strategies-and that the inclusion of any one element in  
the collective culture implies the exclusion of inconsistent elements.  
Or is culture a grab-bag of odds and ends: a pastiche of mediated repre- 
sentations, a repertoire of techniques, or a toolkit of strategies? If so, then  
we might expect less clustering of cultural elements within social groups, less  
strong linkages among the elements, and weaker pressures for the exclusion of  
inconsistent elements.  
Research in cognitive psychology strongly supports the toolkit over the latent- 
variable view and suggests that the typical toolkit is very large indeed. Partic- 
ularly relevant here is research (summarized by Gilbert 1991) on how people  
attribute accuracy or plausibility to statements of fact and opinion. Consistent  
with Swidler's (1986) contention that "all people know more culture than they  
use," Gilbert reports that "The acceptance of an idea is a part of the automatic  
comprehension of that idea, and the rejection of the idea occurs subsequent to  
and more effortfully than its acceptance." In other words, our heads are full of  
images, opinions, and information, untagged as to truth value, to which we are  
inclined to attribute accuracy and plausibility.  
Research on memory tells a similar story, revealing that information (includ- 
ing false information) passes into memory without being "tagged" as to source  
or credibility, and that active inference is required to identify the source of the  
information when it is recalled. Such inferences may be incorrect, yielding  
misattributions of source and credibility (Johnson et al1991).  
This work has several important implications for students of culture. First,  
it refutes the notion that people acquire a culture by imbibing it (and no other)  
through socialization. Instead, it directs the search for sources of stability and  
consistency in our beliefs and representations, first, to schematic organization,  
which makes some ideas or images more accessible than others; and, second,  
to cues embedded in the physical and social environment. 
Second, learning that people retain (and store with a default value of "cor- 
rect'') almost every image or idea with which they have come into contact,  
renders intelligible otherwise anomalous research findings about inconsistency  
in expressions of attitudes across time, cultural volatility in periods of rapid  
change (e.g. the fall of the Soviet system), and the susceptibility of attitudes to  
framing effects (Sniderman & Piazza 1993).  
Third, the research explains the capacity of individuals to participate in multi- 
ple cultural traditions, even when those traditions contain inconsistent elements.  
Fourth, it establishes the capacity of people to maintain distinctive and incon- 
sistent action frames, which can be invoked in response to particular contextual  
cues. Fifth, this work raises the possibility that socialization may be less ex- 
perientially based, and more dependent upon media images and hearsay, than  
many of our theories (for example, Bourdieu's habitus [1990] construct) imply.  
Such inferences as these go beyond the scope of cognitive studies, to be sure,  
and much rides on the precise ways in which schematic organization imposes  
order upon stored knowledge and memory. Nonetheless, recent cognitive re- 
search strongly reinforces the "toolkit" as opposed to the "latent-variable" view  
of culture and, at the very least, places the burden of proof on those who de- 
pict culture as strongly constraining behavior or who would argue that people  
experience culture as highly integrated, that cultural meanings are strongly the- 
matized, that culture is binding, and that cultural information acquired through  
experience is more powerful than that acquired through other means.  
Institution and Agency  
Cognitive research can also enhance our appreciation of the view that culture  
both constrains and enables (Sewell1992). Although this position has become  
virtually catechismic among sociologists of culture, we know little about the  
conditions under which one or the other is the case. Many sociologists believe,  
following Gramsci (1990), that culture, embedded in language and everyday  
practices, constrains people's capacity to imagine alternatives to existing ar- 
rangements. At the same time, we know that people act as if they use cultural  
elements strategically to pursue valued ends (Bourdieu 1990). Cognitive re- 
search cannot answer the essentially sociological question of when culture does  
each, but it can provide direction to the search.  
The finding that culture is stored in memory as an indiscriminately assembled  
and relatively unorganized collection of odds and ends imposes a far stronger  
organizing burden on actors than did the earlier oversocialized view. The ques- 
tion, then, is how the actor organizes the information that she or he possesses.  
Psychological research points to two quite different mechanisms or modes of  
cognition

AUTOMATIC COGNITION The first, and most important, which I refer to as au- 
tomatic cognition is "implicit, unverbalized, rapid, and automatic" (D' Andrade  
1995). This routine, everyday cognition relies heavily and uncritically upon  
culturally available schemata-knowledge structures that represent objects or  
events and provide default assumptions about their characteristics, relation- 
ships, and entailments under conditions of incomplete information.  
Psychological research on schemata is central to the interests of sociologists  
both methodologically (due to advances in techniques that reveal taken-for- 
granted assumptions to which subjects may not have easy verbal access) and  
substantively, for what it tells us about how culture works. Indeed, for some  
purposes, it may be useful to treat the schema as a basic unit of analysis for  
the study of culture, and to focus on social patterns of schema acquisition,  
diffusion, and modification (Carley 1991 makes a related argument).  
Schemata are both representations of knowledge and information-processing  
mechanisms. As representations, they entail images of objects and the relations  
among them. Psychologists use the term broadly [some would suggest too  
broadly (Fiske & Linville 1980)]. It can refer to simple, highly abstract con- 
cepts [for example, container (D' Andrade 1995)]; to concrete activities (buying  
chewing gum), or to complex social phenomena (group stereotypes or social  
roles). Event schemata or scripts (Abelson 1981, Garfinkel 1987) constitute  
an important class of schemata. Special attention has also been given to self  
schemata (Milburn 1987, Markus & Kitayama 1994, Markus et al1997), cultur- 
ally variable representations of the self that provide stability both to individual  
behavior across time and to social interactions within the group.  
Schemata are also mechanisms that simplify cognition. Highly schematic  
cognition is the realm of institutionalized culture, of typification, of the habitus,  
of the cognitive shortcuts that promote efficiency at the expense of synoptic  
accuracy (Berger & Luckman 1967, Bourdieu 1990, Kahneman et al 1982).  
Much cognitive research demonstrates that "schematic material dominates other  
material in accurate recall, in intruded recall, in recognition confidence, in recall  
clustering and in resistance to disconfirmation. . . . Schemata also facilitate  
inaccurate recall when the information is schema consistent" (Fiske & Linville  
1980: 545). In schematic cognition we find the mechanisms by which culture  
shapes and biases thought.  
People are more likely to perceive information that is germane to existing  
schemata Von Hippe! et al (1993) report that experimental subjects are more  
likely to perceive correctly terms that are schematically relevant than those that  
are not. Information embedded in existing schemata and information that is  
schema-dissonant are both more likely to be noticed than information orthogo- 
nal to existing structures (Schneider 1991). Such laboratory findings resonate 
with results in historical sociology and cultural studies: for example, the grad- 
ual and halting acceptance of information about the New World by early modern  
mapmakers (Zerubavel1992); the ways in which archaic physical models con- 
strained medical scientists' interpretation of new evidence about syphilis (Fleck  
1979); and the penchant of male biologists for seeing dominance hierarchies  
when they watch apes and elephant seals (Haraway 1991).  
People recall schematically embedded information more quickly Most psy- 
chological evidence is based on laboratory experiments, which reveal that sub- 
jects remember longer lists of words, or interpret ambiguous stimuli more accu- 
rately, and retrieve information about a story they have heard more effectively  
if it is relevant to preexisting mental structures that render the information inter- 
pretable (Sedikides & Skowronski 1991). But again, there are intriguing socio- 
logical parallels in studies that report cross-cultural differences in descriptions  
of the content of the same novel (Griswold 1987), television program (Liebes  
& Katz 1990), or movie (Shively 1992) that reflect collective preoccupations  
("chronically activated mental structures" in psychological parlance).  
People recall schematically embedded information more accurately When  
Freeman et al (1987) asked members of a faculty workshop to listthe people who  
had attended the previous meeting, they found that long-term attenders correctly  
recalled participants who regularly attended, but forgot the infrequent atten- 
ders. Using a very different method (analysis of Watergate transcripts), Neisser  
(1981) reported that Nixon aide John Dean remembered schema-consistent  
events more accurately than events that were schema-inconsistent.  
People may falsely recall schematically embedded events that did not occur  
Freeman et al's (1987) informants remembered regular attenders as present at  
the meeting in question even when they hadn't been there. When subjects are  
told to code small-group interactions and then given questionnaires about char- 
acteristics of group members shortly thereafter, the post-hoc evaluations yield  
much higher correlations of schematically related behaviors (e.g. criticizing  
or expressing hostility) than do the real-time codings (Shweder 1982). Similar  
confusion of schematic representations for real events may be observed in at  
least some reports of satanic child abuse (Hacking 1995) and in some of former  
President Reagan's speeches.  
The parallel with sociological accounts of institutions is striking. TYpifi- 
cations (mental structures) influence perception, interpretation, planning, and  
action (Berger & Luckman 1967, DiMaggio & Powell1991). Institutionalized  
structures and behaviors (i.e. those that are both highly schematic and widely  
shared) are taken for granted, reproduced in everyday action [Giddens' "struc- 
turation" (1984)] and treated as legitimate (Meyer & Rowan 1977). Indeed, an 
eminent psychologist (Bruner 1990:58) has written explicitly of the "schema- 
tizing power of institutions." Thus the psychology of mental structures provides  
a microfoundation to the sociology of institutions.  
Research on social cognition enhances our understanding of how culture con- 
strains but does not support theories that depict culture as overwhelmingly con- 
straining. Instead, consistent with contemporary sociological theorizing, work  
in psychology provides microfoundational evidence for the efficacy of agency.  
DELIBERATIVE COGNITION In contrast to automatic thought, psychologists  
note a quite different form of cognition, which is "explicit, verbalized, slow,  
and deliberate" (D' Andrade 1995). When sufficiently motivated, people can  
override programmed modes of thought to think critically and reflexively.  
Such overrides are necessarily rare because deliberation is so inefficient in  
its rejection of the shortcuts that automatic cognition offers. Consequently, the  
key question is why people are ever deliberative. Psychologists have identified  
three facilitating conditions in studies that intriguingly parallel work in the  
sociology of culture.  
Attention Psychological research suggests that people shift into deliberative  
modes of thought relatively easily when their attention is attracted to a problem.  
For example, experimenters can create false recollections of a videotape or story  
among laboratory "witnesses" by presenting inaccurate information or asking  
leading questions (Loftus et al 1989). But when the task is changed to ask  
subjects to think carefully about the source of particular bits of information,  
the experimental effect is diminished or eliminated (Johnson et al 1993). In  
experimental studies of attitude-behavior consistency, merely increasing self- 
awareness by placing a mirror in the face of the subject as he or she completes an  
attitude questionnaire significantly increases the attitude-behavior correlation  
(Abelson 1981 :722). Such results parallel the insights of students of social  
movements, who have studied agenda-building and who have also noted the  
effectiveness as an organizing device of reframing issues in ways that call  
attention to problems salient to movement participants (Snow & Benford 1992).  
Motivation People may also shift from automatic to deliberative cognition  
when they are strongly motivated to do so by dissatisfaction with the status  
quo or by the moral salience of a particular issue. For example, although  
racist schemata are accessible to most white Americans, whites can override  
such schemata to some extent through awareness and reflexivity (Devine 1989).  
Marx's theory of class consciousness-which contends that physically prox- 
imate workers facing immiseration will overcome false beliefs through inter- 
action and reflection-is a classic sociological counterpart (and see Bourdieu  
1974). 
when existing schemata fail to account adequately for new stimuli. Research  
on the psychology of intergroup relations suggests that people in task groups  
initially code others on the basis of stereotypes but shift to more deliberate evalu- 
ations when faced with very strong inconsistent evidence (Schneider 1991 :536,  
Berger et a! 1980). Moscovici, whose Durkheimian social psychology dif- 
fers in many respects from other psychological accounts of mental structures  
(Farr & Moscovici 1984, Augoustinos & Innes 1990), argues that collectivities  
confronted with disjunctive social change construct new social representations  
(often anchored in analogies to pre-existing schemata, and often constructed  
deliberatively by experts in the social sciences and mass media) in order to inter- 
pret new stimuli. Such arguments are paralleled in Garfinkel's (1967) breaching  
experiments, which forcibly and painfully overrode automatic processing, and  
in Swidler's contention that ideologies and other consistent cultural forms are  
more influential during unsettled times (1986, Jepperson & Swidler 1994 on  
constitutive vs. strategic culture).  
Psychologists may note that I have paid scant attention to active debates  
about the nature of mental structures and have drawn too sharp a contrast  
between automatic and deliberative processing. Research on culture, however,  
can already benefit from what research on cognition has resolved. The notion  
of schema is a fair approximation of phenomena identifiable in fuzzy outline,  
if not sharp relief, by experimental methods; research on schemata advances  
sociological understandings of culture, especially institutions; and research on  
automatic vs deliberative processing may help sociologists determine what to  
do with the widely believed but theoretically inert notion that both institution  
and agency are central to social life.  
Culture as Supra-Individual  
It is no news to sociologists that culture exists, sui generis, at the collective level.  
(The position taken here-that culture is also manifest in people's heads-is  
probably more controversial.) Nonetheless, psychological research can help us  
appreciate several aspects of culture's supra-individual character that sociolo- 
gists of culture sometimes neglect.  
PLURALISTIC IGNORANCE A lively branch of social-psychological research  
derives from Robert K. Merton's notion of ''pluralistic ignorance" (1957): the  
idea that people act with reference to shared representations of collective opin- 
ion that are empirically inaccurate. Such research directs us to distinguish  
between two senses in which culture is supra-individual: as an aggregate of  
individuals' beliefs or representations, or as shared representations of individu- 
als' beliefs. Substantial evidence indicates that the latter deviates substantially CULTURE AND COGNITION 273  
from the former with significant behavioral consequences and that this process  
represents a basis for the relative autonomy of social norms (Miller & Prentice  
1996, Noelle-Neumann 1993).  
INTERGROUP CONTRAST AND POLARIZATION The existence of group-level  
cultures (shared understanding partly independent of individual beliefs) is also  
suggested by the tendency of groups to adopt public positions more extreme  
than the preferences of their members, especially when acting with reference  
to a contrasting group. What is striking is not polarization per se, but the cul- 
tural availability of polarized stances (representations of collective opinion) on  
which members of each group can converge (Tajfel1981).  
SCHEMATA AS CULTURE Not all schemata are cultural to the same degree.  
Some schemata reflect universal cognitive processes (for example, basic object  
categorization), whereas others may be quite idiosyncratic. Many schemata,  
however, and the schemata of greatest interest to sociologists of culture, en- 
act widely held scripts that appear independent of individual experience. For  
example, the research, cited above, that found coherence in ratings of small  
group behavior emerging only after the fact, led the author (Shweder 1982) to  
speculate that much of what passes as clinical research on personality is really  
about cultural constructions of personhood (and see Meyer 1986).  
COHERENT CULTURES AS EXTERNAL TO PERSONS Despite this chapter's fo- 
cus on subjective representations of culture, we must not forget that relatively  
coherent cultural forms exist independently of persons in the broader environ- 
ment. Indeed, one of the more notable characteristics of modern societies is  
the existence of a cultural division of labor in which intellectual producers in- 
tentionally create and diffuse myths, images, and idea systems (Douglas 1986,  
Farr & Moscovici 1984, Swidler 1997). Other relatively coherent representa- 
tions exist less formally as narratives or stories repeatedly invoked in public  
discourse (Dobbin 1994, White 1992).  
AN INITIAL SYNTHESIS Some would argue that whatever coherence exists  
flows from such externally available sources, i.e. that cultural coherence is  
entirely external to the person. As we have seen, however, such a position  
pushes the healthy shift from the latent-variable to the toolkit one step too far.  
Instead, the research reviewed here suggests that culture works through the in- 
teraction of three forms. First, we have information, distributed across persons  
(Carley 1991). Such distribution is patterned, but not highly differentiating,  
due to the in discriminant manner in which bits of culture are accumulated and  
stored in memory (Gilbert 1991). Second, we have mental structures, espe- 
cially schematic representations of complex social phenomena, which shape 
the way we attend to, interpret, remember, and respond emotionally to the in- 
formation we encounter and possess. Such schemata are more clearly socially  
patterned than are memory traces. Finally, we have culture as symbol systems  
external to the person, including the content of talk, elements of the constructed  
environment, media messages, and meanings embedded in observable activity  
patterns.  
Culture inheres not in the information, nor in the schemata, nor in the sym- 
bolic universe, but in the interactions among them. As we have seen, schemata  
structure our use of information. But people acquire many schemata throughout  
their lives, and some of these are inconsistent both in content and in implica- 
tions for behavior. How is it that people invoke one among the many schemata  
available to them in a given situation?  
To simplify greatly in order to focus upon the aspect of the process most  
relevant to the sociology of culture, selection is guided by cultural cues avail- 
able in the environment. Although a few schemata may be chronically avail- 
able, more often they are primed or activated by an external stimulus or frame  
(Sedikides & Skowronski 1991, Barsalou 1992, Gamson 1992:6-8, Schud- 
son 1989). Framing effects in social surveys-e.g. the finding that whites are  
more likely to accept negative stereotypes of African-Americans if the question  
is preceded by a neutral reference to affirmative action (Sniderman & Piazza  
1993:102-104)-are familiar examples. But schemata can also be activated  
through conversation, media use, or observation of the physical environment.  
Understanding the interaction between two distributions-of the schemata that  
constitute people's cultural toolkits, and of external cultural primers that act  
as frames to evoke (and, in evoking, exerting selection pressures upon) these  
schemata-is a central challenge for sociologists of culture.  
APPLICATIONS  
This section reviews work on cognitive aspects of the sociology of culture  
in light of the perspective developed here. The topics are identity, collective  
memory, social classification, logics of action, and framing.  
Identity  
Identity has become one of the most active research fields in the sociology of  
culture. It is useful to distinguish between two quite different kinds of collective  
identity: the identities of collectives, on the one hand, and collective aspects of  
the identities of individuals on the other.  
IDENTITIES OF COLLECTIVES At the supra-individual level, collective iden- 
tity is a shared representation of a collectivity. Research at this level portrays  
collective identities as highly constructed (Anderson 1983), through explicit 
messages and more subtle elements such as anthems and flags (Cerulo 1994 ).  
Collective identities are chronically contested, as groups vie to produce social  
representations capable of evoking schemata favorable to their ideal or material  
interests (Moscovici 1984, Zerubavel 1994, Friedland & Hecht 1996).  
Another line of research, active in both psychology and sociology, views  
identities and selves as collective representations that vary cross-culturally and  
historically. Markus et al (1996) review research on differences in the cultural  
construction of identity in East Asian and Western societies. Meyer & J epperson  
(1996) contend that the modern self (and its variations in different polities) is a  
constructed identity endowed with agency in relation to the collectivity.  
COLLECTIVE ELEMENTS IN INDIVIDUAL IDENTITIES Much research on collec- 
tive identity is actually about the more complex issue of the ways in which social  
identities enter into the constitution of individual selves. Social identity theory  
views individual identities as comprising prioritized identity-sets based on par- 
ticularistic and role-based group affiliations (Stryker 1986). Self-categorization  
theories also portray collective identities as invoked by conditions that make  
particular identities especially salient (Tajfel & Turner 1986). In this view,  
individual identities reflect elaborated group-identity schemata in proportion to  
strength and recency of activation. Viewing identities as context-dependent in  
this way is consistent with observations of the volatility with which identities  
may gain and lose salience during periods of intergroup conflict.  
Collective Memory  
Collective memory is the outcome of processes affecting, respectively, the  
information to which individuals have access, the schemata by which people  
understand the past, and the external symbols or messages that prime these  
schemata. Like collective identities, research on collective memory portrays  
the phenomenon in both supra-individual and individual terms.  
Several scholars have studied institutional processes that maintain or suppress  
information as part of public culture, such as factors determining the reputation  
and popularity of particular persons or art works (Fine 1996, Griswold 1986,  
Lang & Lang 1988). Much research, however, focuses upon the schematic level,  
studying struggles to define the ways in which members of a society interpret  
widely shared information about their past, either tracking change in the ways  
in which a person or public figure is understood over time (Schudson 1992,  
Schwartz 1991) or analyzing conflict over alternative visions of a collective  
past (Maier 1988, Zerubavel 1994).  
Little research has focused on the interaction between individual and col- 
lective memories. An exception is the work of Schuman & Scott (1989), who  
use survey methods to explore the possibility that the historical events that 
men and women of different generations remember most vividly structure their  
understanding of contemporary social issues.  
Social Classification  
The study of social classification-the social construction and use of category  
schemes-has burgeoned in the last decade. Some work has analyzed processes  
of classification in historical time, describing the emergence of a strongly clas- 
sified artistic high culture (DiMaggio 1982), or the use of social categorization  
in the formation and implementation of social policies (Starr 1992). Of particu- 
lar interest is Mohr's (1994) analysis of"discourse roles," which uses structural  
equivalence analysis to identify the implicit classification of social problems  
and client groups embedded in self-descriptions of social-service and poverty- 
relief organizations in early twentieth-century New York City.  
Other research has focused upon social differentiation in shorter time spans.  
Zelizer (1989) describes the process by which women find ways to differenti- 
ate even money, the universal medium of exchange, in order to imbue it with  
social meaning. Lamont (1992) analyzes the bases upon which men of differ- 
ent regional and national origins make social distinctions that reinforce their  
sense of social honor. Gieryn ( 1997) describes boundary work within scientific  
communities, examining how scientists respond when the strong classification  
science/nonscience is threatened.  
Zerubavel, one of few sociologists to study classification from a cognitive  
perspective, points out that the drive to partition a continuous world appears  
to be a human universal, though the nature of the categories constructed may  
vary significantly among groups (Zerubavel1991, 1997, Douglas 1966). Rosch  
(1978), whose work has dominated psychological thinking on the topic, pro- 
poses (with much experimental support) that cognition is most efficient when  
we chunk many separate features (bits of information) together by thinking  
with a prototype (complete mental image) of an object. Prototypical constructs  
emerge at the most efficient level of abstraction: i.e. where an increase in speci- 
ficity provides the greatest marginal increase in information. Thus we have  
prototypes for "chair" but not "furniture" or "divan," and for "bird" but not  
for "animal" or "sparrow." Although the level at which object prototypes form  
appears to be relatively universal, the specific content of a prototype reflects a  
mix of typicality and availability in a given location (D' Andrade 1995).  
Rosch applied her model of prototypes to relatively simple concepts. Self- 
categorization theory draws on the prototype model (Hogg & McGarty 1990),  
but it remains to be seen if complex social constructs are represented in such  
unambiguous terms. If so, application to role analysis may be useful, in light  
of an intriguing parallel between Rosch's characterization of a prototype as a 
core of essential features and Nadel's (1957) classic definition of social role as  
consisting of a core of entailments and a penumbra of optional features.  
Logics of Action  
Many authors have used the expression "logics of action" to refer to an inter- 
dependent set of representations or constraints that influence action in a given  
domain. Sometimes, of course, the term is used as a synonym for "ideal type"  
(Orru 1991) or, in rational-actor approaches, to refer to situational constraints  
that induce parallel behaviors among players with similar resources given par- 
ticular rules of the game (Block 1990, Offe 1985).  
A richer, more cultural, sense oflogics has emerged in recent work in political  
economy, a view that embeds them in the interaction between mental structures  
instantiated in practical reason (Bourdieu 1990), on the one hand, and institu- 
tional requirements on the other. Friedland & Alford (1991:248-49) provide  
the most thorough exposition and definition, describing "institutional logics"  
as sets "of material practices and symbolic constructions" that constitute an  
institutional order's "organizing principles" and are "available to organizations  
and individuals to elaborate." According to Friedland & Alford, these logics  
are "symbolically grounded, organizationally structured, politically defined and  
technically and materially constrained."  
Similar imagery is apparent in Boltanski & Thevenot's notion of modes  
of justification (1991), institutionally linked discourses embodying specific  
orientations toward action and evaluation. Empirical development of similar  
ideas can be found in Fligstein's (1990) work on "conceptions of control" in  
corporate governance, and in Stark's (1990) analysis of shop floor politics in a  
Hungarian socialist factory.  
Such work requires a taxonomy of institutions, each of which entails a dis- 
tinctive logic. (For Friedland & Alford, the institutions are capitalism, the  
state, democracy, family, religion, and science, each of which has its own ax- 
ial principle and linked routines and rituals.) Conflict erupts from the clash  
of institutional logics, as when a wife views her household labor through a  
marketplace logic of explicit exchange, whereas her husband imposes a family  
logic of selfless service upon the situation.  
The notion of logics is immensely appealing. First, it proposes that external  
rituals and stimuli interact with internal mental structures to generate routine  
behavior. Second, it is consistent with the view that culture is fragmented  
among potentially inconsistent elements, without surrendering the notion of  
limited coherence, which thematization of clusters of rituals and schemata  
around institutions provides. Third, it provides a vocabulary for discussing  
cultural conflict as confrontation between inconsistent logics of action. 
At the same time, the work remains frankly exploratory and calls attention  
to gaps in our current understanding of culture and cognition, which neither  
psychology nor sociology can address. These are the topics of the next section.  
KEY PROBLEMS IN THE STUDY  
OF CULTURE AND COGNITION  
The notion of institutional logics can be reinterpreted as an effort to thematize  
schemata and link them to social structure. In order to exploit the insights this  
perspective offers, students of culture need three things that we now lack: an  
understanding of how schemata aggregate to more complex cultural structures,  
or "logics"; an understanding of cultural change, which, in turn, requires a clear  
understanding of the way in which actors switch among institutional logics; and  
a theory of analogy, which is necessary if we are to understand processes of  
schematic generalization that thematization and switching both require.  
Models of Schematic Aggregation  
Perhaps the highest priority for students of culture and cognition is to develop  
models of thematization, by which I mean the ways in which diverse schemata  
aggregate to more general and sociologically interesting constructs like thought  
styles, stories, logics, paradigms, and ideologies. There are several candidates  
for such models.  
ATOMISTIC DECOUPLING The null hypothesis is that everyday thought is pop- 
ulated by randomly invoked, loosely coupled schemata with little or no higher- 
level architecture. If so, thematization is simply imposed post hoc by cultural  
specialists or embedded in the environment and in everyday routines. Although  
this view is inconsistent with most work in the sociology of culture, and would  
seem ill-equipped to explain either experimental research on schemata or macro- 
cultural change, it cannot now be disconfirmed absolutely.  
NESTED HIERARCHY At the opposite extreme is the view of cross-cultural  
psychologists that culture comprises a hierarchy of nested schemata, arrayed  
from abstract to concrete, with the latter entailed by the former. For exam- 
ple, Markus & Kitayama (1994) view a wide range of cognitive differences  
between Japanese and Americans as flowing from fundamental differences in  
self-schemata. Although they provide compelling evidence of significant in- 
tergroup differences, one need not assume as much coherence as they do.  
DOMAIN-SPECIFICITY There is considerable evidence that information and  
schemata pertaining to different life domains is stored in distinct areas of mem- 
ory, with schematic integration occurring within specific domains (Hirschfeld 
& Gelman 1994). In this view, clusters of schemata are coherent only within  
limited boundaries; taken together, the domains are "more like the collected  
denizens of a tide pool than a single octopus" (D' Andrade 1995:249).  
This view has considerable experimental support, though there is little con- 
sensus as to the size or character of the domains. It is tempting to equate  
"domain" with the institutional realms identified by Friedland & Alford (1991)  
or Boltanski & Thevenot (1990), and to posit that culturally specific "logics  
of action" are thus embedded in schematic organization, but there is at present  
little if any empirical warrant for doing so.  
IDENTITY CENTRALITY Some evidence suggests that affectively hot schemata  
are more salient and have more extensive entailments than do emotionally neu- 
tral structures. Work on identity (Wiley & Alexander 1987, Hogg & McGarty  
1990) suggests the possibility that "the self' may be an emotionally supersat- 
urated cluster of schemata tending toward consistency and stability over time.  
Schemata that are embedded in the self-schemata, then, are more closely artic- 
ulated with other schemata than those that are not incorporated into the self.  
ROLE CENTRALITY By analogy, one can view roles as situationally evoked,  
emotionally activated, partial identities that provide integrated chunks of schem- 
atic organization and permit compartmentalization of different cultural contents.  
This perspective is appealing because it identifies a mechanism (i.e. role ac- 
tivation) connecting schematic triggering to contextual variation, and because  
it is consistent with evidence for domain-specificity of schematic organization.  
Moreover, because roles are embedded in distinctive role relations, this view  
points toward an integration of cultural and network analysis within a single  
framework (McCall 1987).  
Which of these models of schematic thematization best describes the pro- 
cesses by which people integrate schemata is at present anybody's guess. Sig- 
nificant matters-the extent to which ideology enters into conscious experience,  
the patterning of cultural styles or orientations, and the stability of cognition  
across context-ride on its resolution.  
Cultural Change  
A second priority for sociologists of culture is to create theories of cultural  
change that integrate ideas from research on culture and cognition with macroso- 
ciological perspectives. At least four different change processes are crucial to  
understand.  
THEORY OF ENVIRONMENTAL TRIGGERING I have argued that culture enters  
into everyday life through the interaction of environmental cues and mental  
structures. I have further suggested, by combining logic-of-action theories in 
sociology and domain-specificity theories in psychology, that cultural under- 
standings may be fragmented by domain, so that when persons or groups switch  
from one domain to another, their perspectives, attitudes, preferences, and dis- 
positions may change radically. It follows that large-scale cultural changes may  
be caused by large-scale, more-or-less simultaneous frame switches by many  
interdependent actors.  
At the micro level, we need a better understanding of how and why peo- 
ple switch among frames, logics, or domains (White 1995; from a rational  
choice perspective, Lindenberg & Frey 1993). The paradigmatic work on this  
comes from language, where research on code-switching has documented the  
circumstances (ordinarily changes in context, conversation partner, or topic)  
that trigger change in language or dialect (Gumperz 1982). At the macro level,  
the challenge is to create models that link environmental change to patterns of  
switching (White 1995).  
THEORY OF SCHEMA ACQUISITION, DIFFUSION, AND EXTINCTION Psycholo- 
gists have cast substantial light on the acquisition of schemata by individuals  
during development (Nelson & Gruendel 1981, Hirschfeld 1994). Sociolo- 
gists of culture should turn their attention to factors leading to change in the  
distribution and level of activation of cultural representations or schemata in  
the population. Such change may occur if different cohorts acquire particular  
schemata at varying rates; or if changes in the distribution of environmental  
cues lead to enhanced activation or deactivation of particular schemata that  
have already been acquired.  
Diffusion models of the sort that have been used to study the effects of  
media exposure on the adoption of new technologies or beliefs may be useful.  
Diffusion should be most effective where resonance exists between the new  
cultural element and existing schematic organization (Sperber 1985).  
Work in the historical sociology of culture provides some guidance.  
Wuthnow's (1989) macro-theory of ideological change, which points to the im- 
portance of ecological effects on the life chances of new beliefs, may be usefully  
transposed to more micro levels. Tilly (1992) has developed and implemented a  
valuable approach to studying change over time in contentious movement reper- 
toires. Buchmann & Eisner (1996) present evidence of accelerating change  
in the public presentation of selves during the second half of the twentieth  
century.  
A particular challenge is to understand cognitive aspects of major collective  
events in which large numbers of persons rapidly adopt orientations that might  
have appeared culturally alien to the majority of them a short time before. Some  
religious revivals, the emergence of capitalism after the fall of the Soviet Union,  
and some spirals of ethnic antagonism are demanding cases of this kind. 
THEORY OF DELIBERATIVE OVERRIDING It is important to understand not only  
how culture constrains, but how persons and groups can transcend the biasing  
effects of culture on thought. Work on this problem by psychologists (noted  
earlier) must be supplemented by research on the types of social interaction  
that lead large numbers of people to question and, ultimately, to revise their  
schematic representations of social phenomena.  
Analogy and Generalization  
Related to the study of change, but so important that it warrants a section of its  
own, is the problem of analogy and generalization. Sociological theories that  
portray persons as actively incorporating culture into cognitive organization  
invariably rely on some notion like the habitus, which Bourdieu (1990) refers  
to as a "system of durable transposable dispositions." The key question for  
all of these theories is: Under what conditions are dispositions or schemata  
abstracted and transposed from one domain to another?  
Almost all cultural change entails the transfer of some body of ideas or  
images from one content area to another on the basis of similarity judgments.  
Indeed, any attempt to characterize the culture of a group or a people in abstract  
terms-i.e., any analytic effort at thematization-takes for granted that actors  
have the capacity to draw analogies between classes of objects, actors, events,  
or actions, and thereby to understand them in similar ways.  
Think of culture as a network of interrelated schemata, with analogies as the  
"ties" that create paths along which generalization and innovation occur. How  
are new "ties" created? The literature provides at least three alternatives.  
FEATURE CORRESPONDENCE In the most straightforward models, two schem- 
ata or related structures lend themselves to analogy (and thus to generalization  
across domains) insofar as they share particular features (Lakoff & Johnson  
1980) that create a correspondence between them. Thus Swinburne's line,  
"when the hounds of spring are on winter's traces," is meaningful because  
of the correspondence between temporal and spatial pursuit and between the  
destructive effects of hounds on hares and of spring on winter. Two problems  
with this view are that the correspondence itself is constructed rather than innate;  
and that analogical power would not seem to vary with the extent of overlap  
between tenor and vehicle.  
STRUCTURE-MAPPING This view takes as its starting point the existence of  
some form of content-related domain-specificity. Analogies connect not sim- 
ply schemata but whole domains (Tourganeau & Sternberg 1982), deriving their  
power from the network of entailed comparisons they trigger. The most pow- 
erful analogies connect domains that are structurally homologous. Put another  
way, generalizability across domains is a function not of the extent to which 
they share particular features in common, but of the extent to which relations  
among features are structurally similar (Gentner 1983).  
EMOTIONAL RESONANCE Some research suggests that affectively hot schemata  
are more likely to be generalized across domains than affectively neutral sche- 
mata. For example, analogies are likely to be drawn between situations that  
elicit strong emotional reactions of a similar kind (Abelson 1981 :725).  
POLYSEMY AND SEMANTIC CONTAGION A final possibility is that polysemous  
expressions-those with distinct meanings that resonate with multiple schemata  
or domains-facilitate analogical transfer. Bakhtin's work (1986) on textual  
multivocality is suggestive in this regard, as is White's (1992) work on stories  
and rhetorics. Ross (1992) portrays meaning as emerging from the relations  
of words to one another in speech and to activities in real time. Because  
these constantly change, meanings are rarely fixed, but instead adapt, diverge,  
and spread across domains through semantic contagion. This perspective is  
particularly attractive because it acknowledges endemic change in language and  
other symbol systems and because it embeds generalization in social interaction.  
SYMBOLS, NETWORKS, AND COGNITION  
Cognitive aspects of culture are only one-and not necessarily the largest-part  
of the sociology of culture's domain. But it is a part that we cannot avoid if we  
are interested in how culture enters into people's lives, for any explanation of  
culture's impact on practice rests on assumptions about the role of culture in  
cognition. I have argued that we are better off if we make such models explicit  
than if we smuggle them in through the back door and that work in cognitive  
psychology and social cognition, although animated by different questions,  
offers tools that we sociologists can use to pursue our own agendas.  
Ultimately, the challenge is to integrate the micro perspectives on culture de- 
scribed here with analyses of cultural change in larger collectivities over longer  
stretches of time. I have argued for a perspective that privileges schemata andre- 
lated constructs as units of analysis, and attends to mechanisms by which phys- 
ical, social, and cultural environments differentially activate these schemata.  
This argument has begged the question of which aspects of the environment  
are most worthy of study. Without denying the unquestionable importance of  
research on how media and activity structures interact with subjective cultural  
representations, I shall conclude by calling brief attention to new research on the  
relationship of cognitive and symbolic phenomena to social structures portrayed  
as social networks.  
Some researchers have focused on cognitive representations of social struc- 
ture. [Fiske & Linville (1980) claim that schema theory is especially relevant 
that social structures exist simultaneously through mental representations and  
in concrete social relations was central to Nadel's (1957) role theory. Both  
theorists (Emirbayer & Goodwin 1994, Orr 1995, White 1992) and researchers  
(Krackhardt 1987) are exploring the implications of this view.  
Networks are crucial environments for the activation of schemata, logics, and  
frames. In a study of the Paris Commune, Gould (1995) argues that political  
protest networks did not create new collective identities, but rather activated  
identities that communards already possessed. Bernstein (1975) demonstrates  
the impact of network structures on individuals' tendency to employ cognitive  
abstraction. Erickson (1996), studying security guards, finds a correlation be- 
tween the complexity of social networks and the diversity of conversational  
interests. Vaughan (1986) describes how people questioning marriage alter  
customary patterns of social relations in order to create new, independent iden- 
tities as prologue to separation. Such studies point to a new, more complex  
understanding of the relationship between culture and social structure built  
upon careful integration of micro and macro, and of cognitive and material,  
perspectives.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
Thanks are due to the students in my Princeton graduate seminar on culture  
and cognition for insightful discussions of much of the work reviewed here;  
to my psychology colleagues Marcia Johnson, Dale Miller, and Deborah Pren- 
tice, who provided valuable guidance in my efforts to come to speedy terms  
with culture-relevant literature in cognitive and social psychology; and to Bob  
Wuthnow, Dale Miller, Eviatar Zerubavel, Roger Friedland, and John Mohr for  
opportunities to present these thoughts at meetings and workshops at Princeton,  
Rutgers, Santa Barbara, and the ASA meetings. For valuable readings of ear- 
lier drafts, I am indebted to Roger Friedland, Michele Lamont, Diane Mackie,  
Calvin Morrill, Abigail Smith, Ann Swidler, and Eviatar Zerubavel.  
Visit the Annual Reviews home page at  
http://www.annurev.org.  
Literature Cited  
Abelson RP. 1981. Psychological status of the  
script concept. Am. Psycho/. 36:715-29  
Anderson B. 1983. Imagined Communities:  
The Origin and Spread fi{Nationalism. Lon- 
don: Verso  
Bakhtin MM. 1986. Speech genres. In Speech  
Genres and Other Late Essays, ed. C Emer- 
son, M Holquist, pp. 61-102. Austin: Univ.  
Texas Press  
Barsalou LW. 1992. Frames, concepts, and con- 
ceptual fields. See Lehrer & Kittay 1992, pp.  
21-74 
Berger J, Rosenholtz SJ, Zelditch M. 1980. Sta- 
tus organizing processes. Annu. Rev. SocioL  
6:479-508  
Berger PL, Luckman T. 1967. The Social Con- 
struction of Reality. Garden City, NY: Dou- 
bleday Anchor  
Bernstein B. 1975. Social class, language and  
socialization. In Class, Codes and Con- 
trol: Theoretical Studies Towards a Sociol- 
ogy of Language, pp. 170-189. New York:  
Schocken Books. 2nd ed.  
Block F. 1990. Political choice and the multi- 
ple 'logics' of capital. In Structures of Capi- 
tal: The Social Organization of the Economy,  
ed. S Zukin, P DiMaggio, pp. 293-310. New  
York: Cambridge Univ. Press  
Boltanski L, Thevenot L. 1991. De Ia Justifica- 
tion: Les Economies de Ia grandeur. Paris:  
Gallimard  
Bourdieu P. 1974. Avenier declasse et causalite  
du probable. Revue Franfaise de sociologie  
15:3-42  
Bourdieu P. 1984. Distinction: A Social Cri- 
tique of the Judgement of Taste. Trans!. R  
Nice. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press  
Bourdieu P. 1990 [1980]. Structures, habitus,  
practices. In The Logic of Practice, pp. 52- 
65. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press  
Bruner J. 1990. Acts of Meaning. Cambridge:  
Harvard Univ. Press  
Buchmann M, Eisener M. 1996. Images of the  
self: 1900-1992. Pap. presented at Ann.  
Meet. Am. Sociol. Assoc., New York  
Carley KM. 1989. The value of cognitive foun- 
dations for dynamic social theory. J. Math.  
Sociol. 14:171-208  
Carley KM. 1991. A theory of group stability.  
Am. Sociol. Rev. 56:331-54  
Cerulo K. 1995. Identity Designs: The Sights  
and Sounds ofaNation. New Brunswick, NJ:  
Rutgers Univ. Press  
Cicourel AV. 1973. Cognitive Sociology. New  
York: Free Press  
Collins R. 1981. On the microfoundations of  
macrosociology.Am. J. Sociol. 86:984-1014  
D' Andrade R. 1995. The Development of Cog- 
nitive Anthropology. New York: Cambridge  
Univ. Press  
Devine PG. 1989. Stereotypes and prejudice:  
their automatic and controlled components.  
J. Pers. Soc. P.rychol. 56:5-18  
DiMaggio P. 1982. Cultural entrepreneurship in  
nineteenth-century Boston. Media Cult. Soc.  
4:33-50, 303-21  
DiMaggio P, Powell WW. 1991. Introduction. In  
The New Institutionalism in Organizational  
Analysis, ed. WW Powell, P DiMaggio, pp.  
1-38. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press  
Dobbin F. 1994. Cultural models of organiza- 
tion: the social construction of rational or- 
ganizing principles. In The Sociology ofCul- 
ture: Emerging Theoretical Perspectives, ed.  
D Crane, pp. 117-42. Cambridge: Blackwell  
Douglas M. 1986. How Institutions Think. Syra- 
cuse, NY: Syracuse Univ. Press  
Douglas M. 1966. Purity and Danger. London:  
Routledge & Kegan Paul  
Emirbayer M, Goodwin J. 1994. Network anal- 
ysis, culture, and the problem of agency. Am.  
J. Sociol. 99:1411-54  
Erickson B. 1996. Culture, class and connec- 
tions. Am. J. Sociol. 102:217-51  
Fantasia R. 1995. Class consciousness in cul- 
ture, action, and social organization. Annu.  
Rev. Sociol. 21:269-87  
Parr RM, Moscovici S. 1984. Social Represen- 
tations. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press  
Fine GA. 1996. Reputational entrepreneurs and  
the memory of incompetence: melting sup- 
porters, partisan warriors, and images of  
President Harding. Am. J. Soc. 101:1159- 
93  
Fiske ST, Linville PW. 1980. What does the  
schema concept buy us? Pers. Soc. P.rychol.  
Bull. 6:543-57  
FleckL. 1979 [1935]. Genesis and Development  
of a Scientific Fact. Chicago: Univ. Chicago  
Press  
Fligstein N. 1990. The Transformation of Cor- 
porate Control. Cambridge, MA: Harvard  
Univ. Press  
Freeman L, Romney AK, Freeman SC. 1987.  
Cognitive structure and informant accuracy.  
Am. Anthropol. 89:310-25  
Friedland R, Alford R. 1991. Bringing society  
back in: symbols, practices, and institutional  
contradictions. In The New Institutionalism  
in Organizational Analysis, ed. WW Pow- 
ell, P DiMaggio, pp. 223-62. Chicago: Univ.  
Chicago Press  
Friedland R, Hecht R. 1996. To Rule Jerusalem.  
New York: Cambridge Univ. Press  
Gamson WA. 1992. Talking Politics. New York:  
Cambridge Univ. Press  
Garfinkel H. 1987 [1967]. Studies of the rou- 
tine grounds of everyday activities. In Stud- 
ies in Ethnomethodology, pp. 35-75. Oxford:  
Polity  
Gentner, D. 1983. Structure-mapping: a the- 
oretical framework for analogy. Cogn. Sci.  
7:155-70  
Giddens A. 1984. The Constitution of Society:  
Outline of a Theory of Structuration. Berke- 
ley: Univ. Calif. Press  
Gieryn TF. 1998. Cultural Cartography of Sci- 
ence: Episodes of Boundary Work, Sociolog- 
ically Rendered. Chicago, IL: Univ. Chicago  
Press. In press  
Gilbert DT. 1991. How mental systems believe.  
Am. Psychol. 46:107-19  
Gould R. 1995. Insurgent Identities: Class,  
Commmunity and Protest in Paris from 1848 to the Commune. Chicago: Univ. Chicago  
Press  
Gramsci A. 1990. Culture and ideological hege- 
mony. In Culture and Society: Contemporary  
Debates, ed. J Alexander, S Seidman. New  
York: Cambridge Univ. Press  
Griswold W. 1986. Renaissance Revivals: City  
Comedy and Revenge Tragedy in the Lon- 
don Theatre, I576-I980. Chicago: Univ.  
Chicago Press  
Griswold W. 1987. The fabrication of meaning:  
literary interpretation in the United States,  
Great Britain, and the West Indies. Am. J.  
Sociol. 92:1077-117  
Gumperz JJ. 1982. Discourse Strategies. Cam- 
bridge: Cambridge Univ. Press  
Hacking I. 1995. Rewriting the Soul: Multi- 
ple Personality and the Sciences of Memory.  
Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press  
Haraway D. 1991. The past is the contested  
zone. In Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The  
Reinvention of Nature, pp. 21-42. New York:  
Routledge  
HirschfeldLA.l994. The child's representation  
of human groups. Psycho/. Learning & Mo- 
tivation 31:133-85  
Hirschfeld, LA, Gelman, SA. 1994. Toward a  
topography of mind: an introduction to do- 
main specificity. In Mapping the Mind, ed.  
LA Hirschfeld, SA Gelman, pp. 3-35. New  
York: Cambridge Univ. Press  
HofstedeG.l980. Culture's Consequences: In- 
ternational Differences in Work-Related Val- 
ues. Beverly Hills: Sage  
Hogg MA, McGarty C. 1990. Self- 
categorization and social identity. In  
Social Identity Theory: Constructive and  
Critical Advances, ed. D Abrams, MA Hogg,  
pp. 10-27. New York: Springer-Verlag  
Howard JA. 1994. A social cognitive conception  
of social structure. Soc. Psycho/. Q. 57:210- 
27  
Jepperson R, Swidler A. 1994. What proper- 
ties of culture should we measure? Poetics  
22:359-71  
Johnson MK, Hastroudi S, Lindsay, DS. 1993.  
Source monitoring. Psycho/. Bull. 114:3-28  
Kahnemann D, Slovic P, Tversky A. 1982. Judg- 
ment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Bi- 
ases. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press  
Kluegel J, SmithER. 1986. Beliefs about In- 
equality: Americans Views of What Is and  
What Ought To Be. New York: DeGruyter  
Krackhardt D. 1987. Cognitive social struc- 
tures. Soc. Networks 9:109-34  
LakoffG, Johnson M. 1980. Metaphors We Live  
By. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press  
Lamont M. 1992. Money, Morals, and Man- 
ners: The Culture of the French and Ameri- 
can Upper-Middle Class. Chicago, IL: Univ.  
Chicago Press  
CULTURE AND COGNITION 285  
Lang GE, Lang K. 1988. Recognition and  
renown: the survival of artistic reputation.  
Am. J. Sociol. 94:79-109  
Lehrer A, Kittay EF, eds. 1992. Frames, Fields  
and Contrasts: New Essays in Semantic  
and Lexical Organization. Hillsdale, NJ:  
Lawrence Erlbaum  
Liebes T, Katz E. 1990. The Export of Mean- 
ing: Cross-CulturalReadingsofDallas. New  
York: Oxford Univ. Press  
Lindenberg S, Frey BS. 1993. Alternatives,  
frames, and relative prices: a broader view of  
rational choice theory. Acta Sociol. 36:191- 
205  
Loftus EF, Donders K, Hoffman HG, Schooler  
JW. 1989. Creating new memories that are  
quickly accessed and confidently held. Mem- 
ory Cognition 17:607-16  
Maier CS. 1988. The Unmasterable Past: His- 
tory, Holocaust, and German National Iden- 
tity. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press  
Markus HR, Kitayama S. 1991. Culture and the  
self: implications for cognition, emotion and  
motivation. Psycho/. Rev. 98:224-53  
Markus HR. Kitayama S. 1994. The cultural  
construction of self and emotion: implica- 
tions for social behavior. In Emotion and Cul- 
ture: Empirical Studies of Mutua/Influence,  
ed. S Kitayama, HR Markus, pp. 89-130.  
Washington, DC: Am. Psycho!. Assoc.  
Markus HR, Kitayama, S, Heiman, R. 1996.  
Culture and 'basic' psychological principles.  
In Social Psychology: Handbook of Basic  
Principles, ed. ET. Higgins, AW Kruglanski.  
New York: Guilford  
Martin J. 1992. Cultures in Organizations:  
Three Perspectives. New York: Oxford Univ.  
Press  
McCall GJ. 1987. The structure, content, and  
dynamics of self: continuities in the study of  
role-identities. See Yardley & Honess 1987,  
pp. 133-45  
Merton RK. 1957. Social Theory and Social  
Structure. New York: Free Press  
Meyer JW. 1986. Myths of socialization and of  
personality. In Reconstructing Individualism,  
ed. THeiler, S Morton, D Wellberry, pp. 212- 
25. Stanford, CA: Stanford Univ. Press  
Meyer JW, Jepperson RL. 1996. The actor and  
the other: cultural rationalization and the on- 
going evolution of modern agency. Ms., Stan- 
ford Univ. Dept. Sociol.  
Meyer JW, Rowan B. 1977. Institutionalized or- 
ganizations: formal structure as myth and  
ceremony. Am. J. Sociol. 83:340-63  
Milburn MA. 1987. Ideological self-schemata  
and schematically induced attitude consis- 
tency. J. Exp. Social Psycho/. 23:383-98  
Miller DT, Prentice DA. 1994. Collective errors  
and errors about the collective. Person. Soc.  
Psycho/. Bull. 20:541-50 
Miller DT, Prentice DA. 1996. The construction  
of social norms and standards. Handbook o{  
Social Psychology, ed. XX, pp. 799-829. XX:  
XX  
Mohr JW. 1994. Soldiers, mothers, tramps and  
others: discourse roles in the 1907 Charity  
Directory. Poetics 22:327-58  
Moscovici S. 1984. The phenomenon of social  
representations. In Social Representations,  
ed. RM Parr, S Moscovici, pp. 3-69. New  
York: Cambridge Univ. Press  
Nadel SF. 1957. A Theory o.l Social Structure.  
London: Cohen & West  
Neisser U. 1981. John Dean's memory: A case  
study. Cognition 9:1-22  
Nelson K, Gruendel J. 1981. Generalized event  
representations: basic building blocks of  
cognitive development. In Advances in De- 
velopmental Psychology, ed. ME Lamb, AL  
Brown, pp. 131-58. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence  
Erlbaum  
Noelle-Neumann E. 1993 [1980]. The Spiral of  
Silence: Public Opinion-Our Social Skin.  
Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press  
Offe C. 1985. Disorganized Capitalism. Cam- 
bridge, MA: MIT Press  
Orr SW. 1995. Language, values and social net- 
works: on meaning and the micro-macro link  
in structural sociology. Ms., Center for the  
Social Sciences, Columbia Univ.  
Orru M. 1991. The institutional logic of small- 
firm economies in Italy and Taiwan. Stud.  
Compar. Int. Dev. 26:3-28  
Resnick LB, Levine JM, Teasley SD. 1991.  
Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition.  
Washington, DC: Am. Psycho!. Assoc.  
RogoffB, Chavajay P. 1995. What's become of  
research on the cultural basis of cognitive de- 
velopment? Am. Psycho!. 50:859-77  
Rosch E. 1978. Principles of categorization. In  
Cognition and Categorization, ed. E Rosch,  
B Lloyd, pp. 27-48. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum  
Ross 1. 1992. Semantic contagion. See Lehrer  
& Kittay 1992, pp. 143-69  
Salomon G, ed. 1993. Distributed Cognition:  
Psychological and Educational Considera- 
tions. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press  
Schneider DJ. 1991. Social cognition. Annu.  
Rev. Psycho{. 42:527-61  
Schudson M. 1989. How culture works: per- 
spectives from media studies on the efficacy  
of symbols. Theory Soc. 18:153-80  
Schudson M. 1992. Watergate in American  
Memory: How We Remember, Forget, and  
Reconstruct the Past. New York: Basic  
Schuman H, Scott J. 1989. Generations and col- 
lective memories. Am. Sociol. Rev. 54:359- 
81  
Schwartz B. 1981. Vertical Classification: A  
Study in Structuralism and the Sociology o{  
Knowledge. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press  
Schwartz B. 1991. Social change and collec- 
tive memory: the democratization of George  
Washington. Am. Sociol. Rev. 56:221-36  
Sedikides C, Skowronski 11. 1991. The law of  
cognitive structure activation. Psycho!. In- 
quiry 2:169-84  
Sewell WH Jr. 1992. A theory of structure: dual- 
ity, agency, and transformation. Am. J. Social.  
98:1-29  
Shively J. 1992. "Cowboys and Indians": per- 
ceptions of western films among American  
Indians and Anglos. Am. Social. Rev. 57:725- 
34  
Shweder RA. 1982. Fact and artifact in trait per- 
ception: the systematic distortion hypothesis.  
Pmgress in Exp. Personal. Res. 2:65-100  
Shweder RA, Bourne EJ. 1991. Does the con- 
cept of the person vary cross-culturally? In  
Thinking Thmugh Cultures: Explorations in  
Cultural Psychology, ed. R. Shweder, pp.  
113-56. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press  
Sniderman PM, Piazza T. 1993. The Scar o.l  
Race. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press  
Snow DA, Benford, RD. 1992. Master frames  
and cycles of protest. In Frontiers in So- 
cial Movement Theory, ed. AD Morris, CM  
Mueller, pp. 133-55. New Haven, CT: Yale  
Univ. Press  
Sorokin PA. 1957 [1927]. Social and Cultural  
Mobility. New York: Free Press  
Sperber D. 1985. Anthropology and psychol- 
ogy: towards an epidemiology of representa- 
tions. Man 20:73-89  
Stark D. 1990. La valeur du travail et sa  
retribution en Hongrie. Actes de Ia Recherche  
en Sciences Sociales 85:3-19  
Starr P. 1992. Social categories and claims in  
the liberal state. Soc. Res. 59:263-95  
Stryker S. 1987. Identity theory: developments  
and extensions. See Yardly & Honess 1987,  
pp. 89-104  
Swidler A. 1986. Culture in action: symbols  
and strategies. Am. Social. Rev. 51:273-86  
Swidler A. 1997. Talk o.fLove: How Americans  
Use Their Culture. Chicago: Univ. Chicago  
Press  
Swidler A, Arditi J. 1994. The new sociology  
of knowledge. Annu. Rev. Social. 20:305- 
29  
Tajfel H. 1981. Human Groups and Social Cat- 
egories: Studies in Social Psychology. New  
York: Cambridge Univ. Press  
Tajfel H, Turner JC. 1986. The social identity  
theory of intergroup behavior. In Psychology  
of"/ntergroup Relations, ed. S Worchel, WG  
Austin, pp. 7-24. Chicago: Nelson-Hall. 2nd  
ed.  
Tilly C. 1992. How to detect, describe, and ex- 
plain repertoires o.{ contention. Working Pa- 
per No. 150. Cent. Stud. Soc. Change. New  
Sch. for Soc. Res. Tourangeau R, Sternberg RJ. 1982. Understand- 
ing and appreciating metaphors. Cognition  
11:203-44  
Vaughan D. 1986. Uncoupling: Turning Points  
in Intimate Relationships. New York: Oxford  
Univ. Press  
Von Hippe! E, Jonides J, Hilton JL, Narayan S.  
1993. The inhibitory effect of schematic pro- 
cessing on perceptual encoding. J. Personal.  
Soc. Psych. 64:921-35  
Warner WL. 1959. The Living and the Dead:  
A Study of the Symbolic Life ol Americans.  
New Haven: Yale Univ. Press  
WhiteHC.I992.1dentityandControl: A Struc- 
tural Theory of Social Action. Princeton, NJ:  
Princeton Univ. Press  
White HC. 1995. Network switchings and  
Bayesian forks: reconstructing the social and  
behavioral sciences. Soc. Res. 62:1-28  
Wiley MG, Alexander, CN. 1987. From situ- 
ated activity to self attribution: the impact  
of social structural schemata. See Yardley &  
Honess 1987, pp. 105-17  
Willis P. 1977. Learning to Labor. New York:  
Columbia Univ. Press  
Wrong DH. 1961. The oversocialized con- 
CULTURE AND COGNITION 287  
ception of man. Am. Sociol. Rev. 26:184- 
93  
Wuthnow R. 1987. Meaning and Moral Order:  
Explorations in Cultural Analysis. Berkeley:  
Univ. Calif. Press  
Wuthnow R. 1989. Communities !/"Discourse:  
Ideology and Social Structure in the Refor- 
mation, the Enlightenment and European So- 
cialism. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press  
Yardley K, Honess T, eds. 1987. Selfand Iden- 
tity: Psychosocial Perspectives. New York:  
John Wiley  
ZelizerV. 1989. The social meaning of money:  
'special monies.' Am. J. Sociol. 95:342-77  
Zerubavel E. 1991. The Fine Line. New York:  
Free Press  
Zerubavel E. 1992. Terra Cognita: The Mental  
Discovery o.lAmerica. New Brunswick, NJ:  
Rutgers Univ. Press  
Zerubavel E. 1997. Social Mindscapes: An In- 
vitation to Cognitive Sociology. Cambridge:  
Harvard Univ. Press  
Zerubavel Y. 1994. Recovered Roots: Collec- 
tive Memory and the Making o.llsraeli Na- 
tional Tradition. Chicago: Univ. Chicago  
Press 