Consensus and knowledge production in an 
academic field 
John H. Evans 
Department of Sociology, University of California, San Diego, 
9500 Gilman Dr, San Diego, CA 92093-0533, USA 
Available online 16 February 2007 
Abstract 
Scholars have long been interested in the relationship between the amount of consensus in an academic 
field and the amount of scholarly production. In this paper, I describe previous theory and research that suggest 
four possible relationships between the amount of scholarly production and the degree of consensus. These 
relationships are tested with data on the content of 50 sub-debates in the field of bioethics from 1973 to 1995. I 
find support for the conclusion that increased consensus leads to increased scholarly production. I conclude by 
discussing the implications of these findings for the humanities in general and bioethics in particular. 
# 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
Sociologists, along with most academics, are interested in the conditions of their knowledge 
production and study themselves extensively (Mullins, 1973; Whitley, 1984; Turner and Turner, 
1990; Fuchs, 1992; Abbott, 2001). At least since the publication of Kuhn’s The Structure of 
Scientific Revolutions (1970), academics have been interested in the relationship between the 
degree of consensus in a field and the field’s ‘‘progress’’ or, more specifically, its growth in the 
amount of knowledge produced. Kuhn’s theory – for our purposes – can be briefly and simply 
summarized as follows: when a field achieves a paradigm (consensus on the questions to be 
asked, the methods employed, and so on), normal science ensues, resulting in the growth of 
knowledge production. In Kuhn’s words: ‘‘Men whose research is based on shared paradigms are 
committed to the same rules and standards for scientific practice. That commitment and the 
apparent consensus it produces are prerequisites for normal science, i.e., for the genesis and 
continuation of a particular research tradition’’ (Kuhn, 1970:11). 
Can this model of the relationship between consensus and academic production be applied to 
the social sciences or the humanities? Randall Collins (1994, 1998) thinks not, and that the lack 
www.elsevier.com/locate/poetic 
Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 
E-mail address: jhevans@ucsd.edu. 
0304-422X/$ – see front matter # 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
doi:10.1016/j.poetic.2007.01.001of consensus is the norm of scholarly production in the social sciences and humanities. Similarly, 
a book by Abbott (2001), aptly titled Chaos of Disciplines has, as its primary metaphor, the 
‘‘fractal distinction.’’ This book implies that we should not be concerned with whether the degree 
of consensus leads to scholarly production, but rather the inverse, whether scholarly production 
leads to more consensus or less consensus. 
There has been very little scholarly work on this question outside of the natural sciences. In 
this paper, I examine four possible relationships between the degree of consensus in a field and 
the amount of scholarly production. Examining 50 sub-debates over 23 years in the 
interdisciplinary field in the humanities called bioethics, I conclude that Kuhn’s insights can 
indeed be applied to the humanities. 
1. Hypotheses 
Logically, there are four possible relationships between a change in the amount of knowledge 
production and a change in the amount of consensus. For each I will summarize empirical 
research and theories to suggest that it is reasonable to expect that the relationship may be 
operating. 
Ideally, I would only use studies of the humanities, but given that almost none of these exist 
(Lamont, 2000), I will rely upon studies of the natural and social sciences. Given the exalted 
place that the natural sciences have in academia, it is reasonable to think that scholars in other 
fields will try to emulate the practices of knowledge production used in the natural sciences. I will 
prefer studies of the social sciences, given that most scholars consider the social sciences to be 
closer to the humanities in its academic production mechanisms than the natural sciences (Price, 
1970; Cole, 1983; Whitley, 1984; Hargens, 2000). 
The data in this paper are set up as a pooled cross-sectional time series matrix with 
measures of the amount of knowledge production and consensus for 50 sub-debates over 23 
years. A common justification for this design is that, unlike cross-sectional designs, it allows 
for greater leverage on causal mechanisms (Hicks, 1994). That is, with time series data it can 
be determined whether changes in the amount of discursive consensus precede in time 
changes in the amount of production or whether changes in the amount of production precede 
in time changes in the amount of consensus. Although there is obviously much more to 
causality than temporal order, it is at least necessary for causality that the causal force 
preceded the effect. 
Before continuing, I must make some clarifications. The amount of academic publishing is my 
proxy for the amount of scholarly production. I also assume that publishing operates in an 
ecological space. Therefore, debates in academia cannot be studied independently of each other 
because they are all in competition for limited resources, most notably journal space and a place 
in the book publisher’s catalog. Therefore, if one debate is more represented in the journals then 
another debate must decline. 
Also, the data under examination here are what sociologists would describe as a theoretical, 
not an empirical field. In a theoretical field, the consensus that is most important is what I will call 
discursive consensus – an agreed upon language to describe the phenomena. If it were an 
empirical field, discursive consensus would be followed by a second stage: having achieved 
discursive consensus about the problem, an empirical agenda could get under way to determine 
what could be called a substantive consensus. 
Consider this distinction applied to debates about population growth. A theoretical debate 
attuned to achieving discursive consensus would try to reach consensus about whether the 
2 J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21persons in the debate should consider economic growth, female empowerment, religious beliefs 
and/or cultural beliefs about contraceptive usage in their empirical investigations. After reaching 
discursive consensus (a paradigm in Kuhn’s terms) empirical research could begin using the 
discursive consensus as a guide. In the data here – ethical debates about issues in science and 
medicine – there is essentially no empirical research, making the debate purely theoretical and 
the consensus being pursued purely discursive. 
For example, one text about abortion in these data argues that abortion should be considered 
‘‘a violation of the sanctity of life’’ and ‘‘cultural genocide,’’ whereas another text argues that 
abortion should be considered ‘‘female empowerment’’ and ‘‘a medical procedure.’’ Discursive 
consensus in this case entails agreeing to use the same language to describe abortion. Having 
achieved a consensus about what abortion is really about, then, in the Kuhnian version, the debate 
would then move on to the much larger set of detailed questions and debates. 
1.1. Hypothesis 1: More consensus leads to more knowledge production 
To summarize the relevant parts of Kuhn’s theory for our purposes, Kuhn posits ‘‘normal 
science’’ as a state of high consensus on what counts as knowledge, what is an important 
question, and so on. With normal science, debates about fundamental questions can cease, and 
the disciplined investigation of detailed questions begins: 
When the individual scientist can take a paradigm for granted, he need no longer, in his 
major works, attempt to build his field anew, starting from first principles and justifying the 
use of each concept introduced. That can be left to the writer of textbooks. Given a 
textbook, however, the creative scientist can begin his research where it leaves off and thus 
concentrate exclusively upon the subtlest and most esoteric aspects of the natural 
phenomena that concern his group (Kuhn, 1970:19–20). 
With the emergence of the paradigm also comes ‘‘the formation of specialized journals, the 
foundation of specialists’ societies, and the claim for a special place in the curriculum’’ (Kuhn, 
1970:19). In sum, this era of normal science follows the scientific revolution (e.g., an era of low 
consensus) where the reigning paradigm has been overthrown and eventually a new paradigm 
takes its place. While Kuhn was not focused upon the humanities, the general insight could apply: 
increased discursive consensus leads to increased scholarly production.1 
Of course, this Kuhnian mechanism must, on a micro level, work through either the 
gatekeepers of publishing (editors, reviewers), or the behavior of individual writers themselves. 
Studies of peer review in publishing also suggest that this mechanism may indeed be operating 
(Campanario, 1998). One prominent finding is that ‘‘when scholars do not share conceptions of 
appropriate research problems, theoretical approaches, or research techniques, they tend to view 
each other’s work as deficient and unworthy of publication’’ (Hargens, 1988:147). In Kuhnian 
terms, those outside of the paradigm (the consensus) will not be published. Therefore, given the 
ecology of publishing, subfields with low consensus may be selected against in peer review and 
subfields with high consensus selected for in peer review. In sum, this hypothesis can be stated 
more formally as follows (Table 1): 
J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 3 
1 Collins (1994:157) calls Kuhnian normal science ‘‘high-consensus rapid-discovery science,’’ and claims that it is 
fairly unusual in the history of the world, emerging in Europe around 1600 for the physical sciences. Collins attributes its 
formation to the use of research technologies – technologies that are lacking outside of the physical sciences.H1. An increase in degree of consensus leads to an increase in the amount of knowledge 
production or a decrease in the degree of consensus leads to a decrease in the amount of 
knowledge production. 
1.2. Hypothesis 2: More consensus leads to less production 
The Kuhnian thesis is that the paradigm (consensus) makes the debates about fundamental 
questions superfluous and clears the way for the detailed work of ‘‘normal science’’ within the 
assumptions of the paradigm to commence. However, the micro-processes of journal publishing 
may not facilitate this process. Contrary to the publishing mechanism described above, it may be 
that gatekeepers find the less consensual debates about what the paradigm should be more 
exciting than the normal science within an existing paradigm. 
Some existing research suggests this is correct. Hilgartner and Bosk theorize that in debates 
more generally, if an issue does not remain novel, ‘‘if the symbols used to frame a problem 
become too repetitive,’’ then the problem will be decreasingly discussed because of its 
‘‘diminished dramatic value’’ to gatekeepers: ‘‘Editors will decide that lately they have been 
seeing too much about the problem; talk show producers will seek other guests; politicians will 
tackle new issues; foundations will shift funding priorities; and researchers will study different 
topics’’ (Hilgartner and Bosk, 1988:62–63). 
Information scientists have also consistently found that academic journals are biased toward 
‘‘novel content’’ and away from what is perceived to be ‘‘replication’’ (Campanario, 1998:203). 
For example, when authors submitted manuscripts to the Academy of Management Journal 
claiming that the content was novel, the articles were more likely to be accepted (Beyer et al., 
1995). As a past editor of the American Sociological Review wrote, ‘‘the typical published 
article’’ in ASR ‘‘makes new theoretical and empirical contributions’’ (my emphasis) (England, 
1994:v). Therefore, it is possible that as the amount of consensus in a field increases, the amount 
of knowledge production decreases because publishing gatekeepers cut back on publishing in 
that area so as to make room for less-repetitive areas. 
Similar evidence can be found in the non-journal part of academic publishing. As academic 
book publishers are increasingly looking to nonacademic sales as support from universities 
decreases (Powell, 1985; Parsons, 1987), they are increasingly looking for discourse that is 
‘‘controversial’’ (Parsons, 1987:186). It seems that controversial texts, such as the ‘‘dazzling new 
interpretation’’ described by one book editor (Parsons, 1987:186), will not be using consensual 
discourse to examine a problem but will have to break new discursive ground. Therefore, book 
4 J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 
Table 1 
Hypotheses 
Hypothesis 
number 
Formal hypothesis 
H1 An increase in degree of consensus leads to an increase in the amount of production or a decrease 
in the degree of consensus leads to a decrease in amount of production. 
H2 An increase in the degree of consensus leads to a decrease in the amount of production or a 
decrease in the degree of consensus leads to an increase in amount of production. 
H3 An increase in the amount of production leads to a decrease in the degree of discursive consensus 
or a decrease in the amount of production leads to an increase in the degree of consensus. 
H4 An increase in the amount of production results in an increase in the degree of discursive 
consensus or a decrease in the amount of production results in a decrease in the degree 
of discursive consensus.publishers may also select against consensual sub-debates, decreasing the number of texts 
published in the area and thus decreasing scholarly production in that area. 
The second hypothesis is then that increased consensus in a particular debate will lead to less 
academic production as current communicators move on to areas which ‘‘need work’’ and 
potential communicators to not enter a debate at all: 
H2. An increase in the degree of discursive consensus results in a decrease in the amount of 
production or a decrease in the degree of discursive consensus leads to an increase in amount of 
production. 
1.3. Hypothesis 3: Increased production leads to decreased consensus 
The primary advantage of time series data is that the analyst can assess whether a change in X 
precedes a change in Y or a change in Y precedes a change in X. In this case, the data can shed 
light on whether a change in the degree of consensus leads to a change in the amount of scholarly 
production (H1 and H2) or whether a change in the amount of production leads to a change in the 
degree of consensus. 
Some of the discussions of the relationship between consensus and the amount of scholarly 
production actually do reverse the causality assumed in H1 and H2 above. For example, in 
making his case that debates in sociology evolve through ‘‘fractal’’ distinctions – a model too 
complex to be modeled with the data used here – Abbott (2001:22–23) describes traditional 
differentiation as another possible mechanism. If traditional differentiation is operating, with 
increased production of new texts, subdivisions in discourse form, and those subdivisions form 
subdivisions, resulting in an endless proliferation of discourse and therefore less consensus. 
Abbott assumes that with fractal distinctions the same divisions keep replicating themselves at 
each level of differentiation, suggesting that increased production may not actually result in less 
consensus. However, each of these distinctions occurs at a more specified level, so it is also 
possible that the discourse would not actually be the same. 
Published histories of the bioethics debate under examination in this paper also suggest a 
differentiation process leading to less consensus may be occurring. Thirty years ago there were 
very few texts in the field of bioethics, and participants in the debate felt themselves to be experts 
on many topics. Now with the great growth in the amount of academic production, the debaters 
are specialists. They are ‘‘experts in the ethics of genetics or the ethics of health policy or the 
ethics of the health care industry,’’ each of which may have a distinct theory; ‘‘foundationalist, 
deconstructionist, feminist, or cultural’’ (Jonsen, 1998:406). 
This differentiation would ultimately be mediated through publishing. The publishing bias 
away from consensual issues and toward ‘‘novel’’ content (described above) may encourage the 
proliferation that Abbott describes if authors feel compelled, due to increased competition, to 
continuously distinguish themselves from their competitors. Therefore, more formally: 
H3. An increase in the amount of scholarly production leads to a decrease in the degree of 
discursive consensus or a decrease in the amount of scholarly production leads to an increase in 
the degree of consensus. 
1.4. Hypothesis 4: Increase in production leads to increased consensus 
There is one remaining logical possibility, which also corresponds with how the scholars in 
this study view their field. Certainly unlike almost all of the fields that make up the natural 
J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 5sciences, and certainly unlike most social science and humanities disciplines, the bioethics field 
thinks of itself as an institution in the public sphere. Charles Taylor (1995) defines the public 
sphere as ‘‘a common space in which the members of society are deemed to meet through a 
variety of media: print, electronic, and also face-to-face encounters; to discuss matters of 
common interest; and thus to be able to form a common mind about these’’ (185–186). The 
institutions of the public sphere are then those locations where the ‘‘common mind’’ – consensus 
formation – can occur, and this consensus can subsequently be presented to the state as the will of 
the governed. The media is perhaps the preeminent institution in the public sphere, but religious 
groups (Wuthnow, 1994), social movement organizations (Minkoff, 1997), voluntary 
associations (DiMaggio and Anheier, 1990) as well as parts of academia can be institutions 
where consensus is thought to form. Deliberation through publishing, in this view, leads to 
consensus. I would expect that this mechanism could be generalized from bioethics to any policy- 
oriented field. 
Dominant groups in the field do think of the field as debating amongst itself to ‘‘clarify’’ 
ethical problems for the public, so that we as a society can decide what to do about an issue like 
stem cell research. Through scholarly communication they weed out the good ideas from the bad, 
making for a more reasoned debate (Evans, 2002), which also then leads to a consensual debate 
due to the weeding. For example, a government report says that bioethics commissions arise 
‘‘from a desire for mechanisms to articulate common values and foster consensus in the face of 
growing cultural and religious heterogeneity’’ (U.S. Congress, 1993:7). This is not only true 
about bioethics commissions – which are the ultimate form of influence in bioethics and thus a 
prime audience for academic writing (Evans, 2002) – but of the academic bioethics enterprise 
more broadly. In his canonical study of the discipline of bioethics and consensus, Moreno (1995) 
concludes that ‘‘although bioethics as an academic subject is not directly engaged in the 
processes of achieving societal consensus, there is surely an interactive relationship between 
bioethics in the academy and bioethics in the policy-making and clinic realms’’ (7). 
As an example of how academic bioethical debate is thought of as a process of consensus 
formation, consider the debate about human genetic engineering. In 1986 a committee of the 
National Institutes of Health formally allowed the submission of research protocols for the 
genetic engineering of human beings as long as the changes could not be passed on to 
descendants. The chair of the committee, an academic, would later state that the regulations 
represented ‘‘an attempt to distill 15 years of ethical discussion in published articles and books, at 
public symposia, and in government hearings and reports in the United States and Europe’’ 
(Walters, 1986:226). In sum, we are left with a final hypothesis that is perhaps particular to 
academic fields that purport to influence public policy. That is: 
H4. An increase in the amount of knowledge production results in an increase in the degree of 
discursive consensus or a decrease in the amount of knowledge production results in a decrease in 
the degree of discursive consensus. 
2. Data and measures 
To evaluate these hypotheses, I examined sub-debates in the academic field now called 
‘‘bioethics’’ or ‘‘bio-medical ethics’’ from 1973 to 1995. The debates concern the ethics of 
medical or scientific procedures: abortion, euthanasia, organ transplantation, and 47 other issues. 
To approximate this debate, I examined information from 51,892 texts stored in the Bioethicsline 
bibliographic database at the National Institutes of Medicine. 
6 J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21The content of each of these 51,892 texts has been summarized by a team of professional 
bibliographers as having discursive properties described by ‘‘keywords’’ (Bioethics Information 
Retrieval Project, 1995). Keyword data have been used fairly extensively by sociologists of 
science who call the technique ‘‘qualitative scientometrics’’ (Callon et al., 1986) or ‘‘co-word 
analysis’’ (Law et al., 1988; Whittaker, 1989; Courtial and Law, 1989). Although unique to this 
database, the 651 keywords that are used in this database are analogous to the subject headings 
that can be searched in any library’s computerized catalog. Each text was assigned between 1 and 
45 keywords by the bibliographers.2 This textual database was translated into a numeric matrix 
where the 51,892 texts were cases and the 651 keywords were variables. A value of 1 was 
assigned if the keyword is assigned to a text and 0 if the keyword was not assigned, and the year 
of publication of the text was also added as a variable (see Appendix A for more details). 
The bibliographers do not clearly demarcate keywords indicating the text discusses a sub- 
debate from keywords that indicate some other form of discourse. Therefore, I defined a sub- 
debate in bioethics as a text concerning a physical act (or inaction) engaged in by a human with 
the intended result of a physical or behavioral change in another person or themselves.3 I then 
examined the definitions used by the bibliographers for all of the keywords and found 50 
keywords that fit my definition of a sub-debate (Bioethics Information Retrieval Project, 1995).4 
The remaining 601 keywords describe other aspects of the texts and will be used to measure the 
degree of consensus. (The first 100 keywords are listed in Appendix B, and the remainder are 
available from the author or in the Bioethics Information Retrieval Project (1995).) Texts that 
were not assigned 1 of the 50 sub-debate keywords were dropped from the analysis. 
2.1. Measuring the amount of knowledge production 
The amount of knowledge produced in a sub-debate in a given year is operationalized quite 
simply as the number of texts that were assigned the keyword representing the sub-debate in that 
year. 
J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 7 
2 Mean = 14.22, S.D. = 7.57. 
3 Bioethics is ultimately about how we should act. This definition was made to limit the number of sub-debates so as to 
make the research logistically possible. As an example, ‘‘psychological stress’’ was not considered in the analysis, but 
‘‘psychosurgery’’ was. ‘‘Psychosurgery’’ is defined in the database as ‘‘treatment of psychiatric disorders by the surgical 
removal of cerebral tissue or by the interruption of pathways in the brain’’ – a sub-debate that fits my restrictive inclusion 
strategy. ‘‘Psychological stress’’ nonetheless falls outside of my inclusion strategy because it is indicative of a state of 
being, not an act. 
4 I also set a threshold where the keyword representing the sub-debate had to have been coded onto at least 400 of the 
texts in the database and have been applied to texts at least back until 1975 to ensure the statistical validity of across time 
claims. The mean number of texts for each sub-debate is 1634 (S.D. = 1554, range = 401–8240). A common concern here 
would be that by restricting analysis to the sub-debates coded on or before 1975, I am biasing the data away from more 
recently emerging sub-debates that may have different dynamics. Although possible, this concern is mitigated because the 
persons in these sub-debates were very forward looking, anticipating issues many years before they occur. For example, 
human cloning – which is not yet possible – was one of the original keywords used in the database in 1973. Therefore, 
there are very few sub-debates that were not anticipated in the first year. The 13 sub-debates that fit my definition (and 
averaged at least 20 cases per year during the years they were used) but were dropped due to their late introduction are 
Anonymous Testing (1991), Cesarean Section (1988), Child Abuse (1983), Child Birth (1979), Contact Tracing (1989), 
Directed Donation (1990), DNA Fingerprinting (1991), Fetal Therapy (1984), Fetal Tissue Donation (1979), Home Care 
(1990), Pre-implantation Diagnosis (1991), Quarantine (1988), and Resuscitation (1994). It is unlikely that including 
these sub-debates would substantially change the analysis because, due to their recent introduction, they add few cases.2.2. Measuring the amount of discursive consensus 
Measuring the degree of discursive consensus is more complicated. To measure the extent of 
discursive consensus about a sub-debate in a particular year, I use all of the keywords, including 
the ones that are defined as sub-debates. Consider the 651 different keywords that could be 
assigned to a text as the components of the discursive language – as a system of symbols – for a 
particular sub-debate, and the sum of all of the keywords assigned to texts discussing the problem 
as the entire discourse spoken about that problem during that year. To help conceptualize this 
move, imagine that the texts in the database were all translated into this new language and 
published. Each text would fit in a few lines, as it would be simply a list of keywords with their 
associated definitions. What each text was about would be a bit more difficult to discern – as the 
651 symbols in this new language do not allow for the precision in English – but this lack of 
precision will be consistent across sub-debates. 
As an example, consider a 1973 text that was one ofthe first texts entered into this database by the 
bibliographers. In addition to ‘‘abortion’’ it was coded as concerning the following symbols 
(keywords): ‘‘fetuses,’’ ‘‘infanticide,’’ ‘‘psychological stress,’’ ‘‘religion,’’ ‘‘values,’’ and 
‘‘children.’’ In another text coded as concerning ‘‘abortion’’ from the same year, a different 
writer discussed abortion with the symbols ‘‘abortion on demand,’’ ‘‘autonomy,’’ ‘‘killing,’’ 
‘‘legislation,’’ ‘‘social impact,’’ and ‘‘violence.’’ 
This is a vague language. Keywords do not provide information about supporting or opposing 
claims, only that they are discussed. Moreover, in the example above, ‘‘violence’’ could reference 
the act of abortion, or the situation that lead a woman to want an abortion. Discourse about 
‘‘violence’’ against women might be on the rise, while discourse about ‘‘violence’’ against 
fetuses on the decline. It is critical to note that measurement is occurring at one level of 
abstraction above these two hypothetical and more specific claims: that ‘‘violence’’ toward some 
entity is (or is not) a claim being used in the abortion debate. There may be increasing consensus 
in the discourse that ‘‘violence’’ of some type is implicated in the abortion debate, or there may 
be an increasing consensus that ‘‘love’’ (another keyword) is an important part of the debate.5 
Note, however, that this same problem exists for the majority of content analysis studies that are 
based on the co-occurrence of themes within blocks of text (Mohr, 1998; Roberts, 2000:263). The 
keywords coded onto the two texts examined above are then the (simplified) discourse between 
these two authors in 1973. It is a limited language, but a language nonetheless, and to compare 
discourse across 23 years and 50 sub-debates, a limited language is necessary. 
The keywords are the larger, more theoretical ideas that make up the description of the sub- 
debate. In the Kuhnian thesis, once more consensus is achieved in this discourse (when fewer 
keywords are used), then the debate would increase in volume with the differences between the 
texts being in smaller details that are too specific to justify separate keywords. 
The degree of consensus about abortion in 1973 is then, for example, the extent to which the 
264 texts that discuss abortion in that year concentrate their language use on similar symbols 
(keywords). If 20 keywords comprise 80% of the keywords used in all of the texts in 1973, but 40 
8 J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 
5 Note that my interpretation of the connection between this language and the ‘‘real’’ meaning of the text, done here for 
expository purposes, is actually irrelevant to the analysis. Although I do need to make the case that the keywords I select 
as representing sub-debates were indeed used by the coders as I suggest, for the remainder of the keywords the exact 
meaning is irrelevant, as long as the coders did not change their usage of them between sub-debates. To clarify ambiguous 
definitions in the coder’s thesaurus, I interviewed the director of the coding center.keywords comprise 80% of the keywords assigned in 1974, we would say that consensus in the 
discourse about abortion has declined between the two years. More formally, the degree of 
consensus in language use has been measured by linguists (Greenberg, 1956; Lieberson, 1964) as: 
C ¼ S p2 
i 
where C is the consensus in keyword use and pi the proportion of the total assigned keywords in 
that year that are for keyword i. C ranges between 0 (no consensus) and 1 (total consensus on one 
keyword).6 
As an example, imagine that of the 651 possible keywords, in a particular year the top five most 
used keywords represented .3, .2, .1, .05, and .03 of the keywords assigned to the texts. With a few 
keywords dominating the discourse, the consensus measure is .32 + .22 + .12 + .052 + .032 = .014. 
In the next year, however, the total debate over abortion is spread across more symbols (keywords) 
in the language – there is less consensus on how to describe the abortion ‘‘problem’’ – and the top 
five keywords represent .05, .05, .03, .02, and .01 of the total keywords assigned (.052 + 
.052 + .032 + .022 + .012 = .006). For clarity, this example only used the top five keywords, but in 
my measure I used all 651 of them. The identified sub-debates are listed in Table 2, along with the 
number of texts that refer to these problems (amount of production) and the average degree of 
discursive consensus across the years.7 
3. Estimation 
The amount of knowledge produced in a sub-debate (number of texts) and the degree of 
consensus among those texts in each of 23 years for each of 50 sub-debates were calculated from 
the raw data, creating a pooled cross-sectional time series data set of 23(t)  50(i) = 1150 cases. 
Economists have long been concerned with the empirical question of determining whether a 
change in X preceded a change in Yor vice versa (e.g., whether a change in monetary policy leads 
to a change in economic conditions or a change in economic conditions leads to a change in 
J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 9 
6 This is also the Herfindahl index of concentration (Taagepera and Ray, 1977). This measure is more intuitive in its 
application to geographic linguistic diversity. If in a given year in a neighborhood in New York, 55% of the population’s 
primary language was English, 24% Spanish, 12% Chinese, and 3% Yiddish, with smaller languages being used by the 
remaining residents, the concentration in language use would be: .552 + .242 + .122 + .032 
+  = .375 (with the ellipses 
representing the little used languages). 
Scholars have found that the Herfindahl index is sensitive to the number of components in the system, particularly 
when the number of components is low (Taagepera and Ray, 1977:370). Since the calculation of the consensus measure 
for each problem/year combination included a high number of components (mean = 225), it was anticipated that this 
would not be too great of a concern. To be certain, I calculated the Ray and Singer concentration coefficient for each 
problem year combination, which modifies the Herfindahl index to take the number of categories into account. There is a 
.90 correlation between the Ray/Singer measure and the Herfindahl index, presumably because of the large number of 
categories used to calculate the Herfindahl index. As one final check, I replicated the analyses of the paper using the Ray 
and Singer measure and found no substantive differences in the results. 
Voas, Olson and Crockett have noted that the use of the Herfindahl index in the study of religious pluralism has been 
flawed by using some of the same data to construct the Herfindahl as an independent variable and religious participation 
as the dependent variable (Voas et al., 2002). I do not have this problem because keywords and number of publications are 
unrelated. 
7 The overall mean consensus score across all sub-debates is .03 (S.D. = .01, range .018–.076). These generally low 
values are due to the large number of symbols in the ‘‘language’’ and the fairly low degree of discursive consensus. 
However, since we are not interested in the degree of consensus but rather in comparing consensus across sub-debates and 
years, the absolute magnitude of this variable is not of concern.monetary policy). Their traditional method for assessing this question is called the ‘‘Granger 
causality test’’ (Granger, 1969; Pindyck and Rubinfeld, 1991:216–219; Gujarati, 1988:542–543). 
Keeping in mind that in this framework ‘‘causality’’ only means temporal precedence, if a change 
in one variable precedes in time a change in another, it is said, in economics parlance, that the first 
variable ‘‘Granger causes’’ the other. 
While sociologists have not used this method, it is part of the methodological cannon of political 
scientists, who also call it vector autoregression (Freeman, 1983; Freeman et al., 1989). For 
example, political scientists have used the Granger test to examine whether the President shapes the 
media’s agenda or the media shapes the President’s agenda (Edwards and Wood, 1999; Wood and 
Peake, 1998); whether political-economic information is transmitted from the higher educated 
classes to the lower classes, or from the lower classes to the higher classes (Granato and Krause, 
2000); whether conflict leads to arms transfers or arms transfers leads to conflict (Kinsella, 1994); 
and whether changes in international trade precede changes in bilateral cooperation, or changes in 
bilateral cooperation precede changes in international trade (Reuveny and Kang, 1996). The one 
article using the method in a general sociology journal was actually written by two political 
scientists, and it examines whether foreign direct investment causes domestic investment or 
whether domestic investment causes foreign direct investment (de Soysa and Oneal, 1999). 
The basic logic of the test is simple. If past values of a time series Y help predict the present 
value of X, then Y ‘‘Granger causes’’ X. As a practical matter, the test is conducted by creating a 
10 J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 
Table 2 
Degree of discursive consensus and amount of production 
Amount of 
production 
Degree of 
consensus 
Amount of 
production 
Degree of 
consensus 
Abortion 6024 .02670 Involuntary commitment 1671 .03981 
Active euthanasia 1904 .03056 Involuntary euthanasia 428 .02118 
Adoption 401 .02102 Involuntary sterilization 618 .03243 
Allowing to die 8240 .02916 Killing 1863 .02696 
Amniocentesis 503 .02301 Mass disease screening 1617 .03557 
Artificial insemination 1219 .02521 Non therapeutic research 1026 .03878 
Behavior control 939 .02364 Organ donation 2152 .02386 
Behavioral research 1177 .03132 Organ transplantation 2064 .02524 
Contraception 1689 .02072 Ovum donation 772 .04499 
Determining death 1753 .03488 Persistent vegetative state 1887 .04497 
Embryo transfer 1308 .04035 Population control 661 .03111 
Eugenics 1361 .01889 Prenatal diagnosis 2045 .02409 
Euthanasia 1111 .02145 Prolongation of life 2806 .02955 
Extraordinary treatment 1016 .03504 Psychosurgery 498 .02444 
Family planning 674 .03480 Reproduction 1677 .01800 
Fetal research 524 .07584 Reproductive technology 1975 .02199 
Fetal tissue donation 631 .02509 Selective abortion 1907 .02130 
Gene therapy 1110 .03604 Semen Donation 710 .04473 
Genetic counseling 1423 .02509 Sexual sterilization 832 .02613 
Genetic intervention 1327 .02293 Suicide 1242 .02329 
Genetic Screening 2050 .02359 Surgery 1806 .03036 
Heart transplantation 625 .04796 Surrogate motherhood 1211 .03301 
Human experimentation 7427 .02568 Therapeutic abortion 788 .03680 
Immunization 448 .02339 Therapeutic research 1282 .03515 
In vitro fertilization 2042 .03311 Voluntary euthanasia 1231 .03838 
Fifty sub-debates, Bioethicsline data 1973–1995. N = 51,892. Note: Definitions for these problems can be found in the 
thesaurus of the Bioethics Retrieval Information Project (1995).model with X as the dependent variable and previous values of both X and Y as independent 
variables (other independent variables can also be added to the model). An F-test to determine 
the collective significance of the lagged Y values is used to determine whether they help predict 
X. The inverse test is then conducted to determine whether X ‘‘Granger causes’’ Y. Using the 
topic of this paper as the example, there are four possible conclusions from these two models. 
(1) If the lagged values of the change in consensus significantly predict the change in the amount 
of production, but the lagged values of change in the amount of production do not predict the 
change in the amount of consensus, then the change in the amount of consensus ‘‘Granger 
causes’’ the change in the amount of production. (This would support either hypothesis 1 or 2, 
depending on the sign of the coefficients.) 
(2) Inversely, if the lagged values of changes in the amount of production significantly predict the 
change in the amount of consensus, but the lagged values of changes in consensus do not 
predict the change in the amount of production, then the change in the amount of production 
‘‘Granger causes’’ consensus. (Depending on the sign of the coefficients, this would support 
either hypothesis 3 or 4.) 
(3) If both directional tests have significant results, then a feedback mechanism or what economists 
call a ‘‘bilateral causality’’ system is suggested. (I will not discuss this more complicated 
phenomena further because it does not emerge as a major component of the findings.) 
(4) If neither 1, 2, or 3 holds true, then the two variables are independent. 
With most studies of social processes, there is no obvious conclusion to the decision about 
how many lags to include in the model. While there are methods to derive an optimal number of 
lags from the data itself (Sims, 1980), it is better to let our theories of the underlying mechanisms 
determine lag length. Also, as usual, this decision implies a tradeoff: in this case, between 
including enough lags to correctly model the underlying mechanism, but without losing too much 
of the data (for every additional lag, 1 year from the data is lost (1/23rd of the total)). 
Given that the underlying mechanism is academic publishing processes, a very long lag 
structure is called for. The mechanism is this: gatekeepers note that a debate has changed in some 
way and begin to make selections differently; followed by the perception of these changes by the 
authors; followed by a change in their writing style; followed by a change in what is submitted to 
the gatekeepers. Given the start-up costs of learning the scientific details and previous ethical 
analyses of a particular sub-debate, scholars are probably resistant to change, meaning that the 
primary mechanism of change might not be the behavior of authors already contributing to the 
bioethics debate but rather that authors of texts on sub-debates of declining importance leaving 
the debate and those interested in increasingly important sub-debates joining. Given that the time 
between the writing of a text and its publication is probably at least a year or 2 itself, I will assume 
that the minimum lag structure is at least 3 years. Given the uncertainty of this estimate, I will 
conduct parallel analyses for lag times of 4, 5, 6, and 7 years. There is a limit to this process, 
because of the data lost for each additional year. For example, using a 7-year lag changes the 
years under examination from 1973–1995 to 1980–1995. To save presentation space, I will 
present all of the coefficients for the model for a 5-year lag, because simple lag length 
determination measures suggest that it is the optimal length,8 and provide summary results of the 
J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 11 
8 Given that I am presenting models for a range of lag times selecting the mechanism for determining lag length is less 
important. I therefore relied upon the simplest version, which is a maximization of adjusted R squared (Judge et al., 
1988:728).F-tests for the models of the remaining lag times. Before conducting the Granger causality test, it 
must be ascertained that the data conform to the assumptions of the method. I have done so, and I 
report the results in Appendix C. 
4. Results 
The first column in Table 3 reports the model for predicting the percentage change in the 
degree of discursive consensus from the previous period. The critical independent variables for 
the Granger test in this case are the second set, the lagged values of the change in the amount of 
production. (The lagged values of the dependent variable, placed in the model as independent 
variables, are of no substantive interest.) Here we see that none of the lagged coefficients of 
interest are significant. Their joint significance is formally tested through an F-test, reported at 
the bottom of the column, which shows that the lagged values are also collectively not 
significant. 
This means that the ideal self-image of the bioethics field (H4) is not empirically 
correct. Moreover, while an increase in the amount of production does not increase the 
amount of consensus, this same model shows that an increase in the amount of production 
also does not result in a decrease in the amount of consensus (H3). If the fracturing of 
12 J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 
Table 3 
Selected parameter estimates 
Independent variables Dependent variable 
% change in degree of 
discursive consensus 
% change in the 
amount of production 
% change in discursive consensus 
Year t  1 .2151 (.0438)*** .5162 (.0606)*** 
Year t  2 .0918 (.0374)* .3894 (.0651)*** 
Year t  3 .0020 (.0352) .4208 (.0657)*** 
Year t  4 .0382 (.0326) .3220 (.0627)*** 
Year t  5 .0331 (.0273) .1769 (.0542)** 
% change in production 
Year t  1 .0182 (.0163) .1893 (.0329)*** 
Year t  2 .0036 (.0164) .1194 (.0331)*** 
Year t  3 .0276 (.0159) .1401 (.0320)*** 
Year t  4 .0056 (.0143) .0528 (.0286) 
Year t  5 .0146 (.0134) .0070 (.0270) 
Amount of production in year t – .0025 (.0005)*** 
Amount of consensus in year t 5.642 (1.026)*** – 
Constant .1054 .1364 
R2 .297 .265 
Collective significance (F-test) for % change in: 
Amount of production variables 1.08 – 
Consensus variables – 19.89*** 
‘‘Granger causality’’ models with 5-year lag time. Note: Forty-nine sub-debates (i) and 16-year (t) dummy variables are 
included in each model but are not shown (standard errors in parentheses). 
* p < .05 (two-tailed tests). ** p < .01 (two-tailed tests). *** p < .001 (two-tailed tests).discourse does occur as the amount of texts grow, it does not lead to a decrease in 
consensus. This is suggested by the subtle point made by Abbott, that the fractal distinctions 
caused by increased academic production result in identical discursive distinctions at each 
level. 
The second column in Table 3 shows the model predicting the percentage change in the 
amount of production, which includes the five lagged values of changes in the amount of 
discursive consensus. The top block of variables is of substantive interest. The individual 
coefficients of these lagged variables suggest that change in the degree of consensus is 
strongly predictive of changes in the amount of production. The joint significance of these 
coefficients is confirmed with an F-test (19.89), which is also highly significant. In this case, 
the signs of the coefficient must be examined to determine the direction of the relationship, 
and the consistent positive coefficients across all five lags suggest that an increase in 
consensus leads to an increase in the amount of production. Hypothesis 1 seems to be correct, 
while hypothesis 2 is incorrect. The Kuhnian mechanism is embodied in the academic 
publishing process, and also seems to apply not only to the natural sciences but also to the 
humanities. Finally, Table 4 summarizes the F-statistics for models that assume alternative 
lag lengths. We see that the different specifications of the model essentially have the same 
substantive result. 
5. Discussion and conclusion 
The Kuhnian perspective on academic production is supported by these data from the 
bioethics field. Again, this accords with more anecdotal evidence. For example, a few years 
ago in the American Sociological Review, a dialogue between the editors and the deputy editors 
about the gatekeeping process was published. When asked whether the review process favors 
certain types of manuscripts, one deputy editor responded that ‘‘I have the sense that highly 
creative and original work that falls outside conventional categories or that offers distinctly 
unfashionable arguments may have a tougher time running the reviewer gauntlet, in part because 
many reviewers may not know what to make of such submissions.’’ The next deputy editor in the 
dialogue agreed, saying that ‘‘there is an inherently ‘‘conservative’’ bent in the peer review 
process that may make it more difficult for work that departs in a significant way from established 
paradigms to get accepted’’ (Camic and Wilson, 2001:viii). In the ecology of journal publishing, 
this would suggest that a sub-field with a low degree of consensus will tend to have many rejected 
papers and thus less overall production, while fields with high degrees of consensus will have 
J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 13 
Table 4 
Joint F-tests of past values of change variables 
Lag length Amount of production ‘‘Granger causes’’ Discursive consensus ‘‘Granger causes’’ 
Discursive consensus Amount of production 
4 2.44* (.21) 13.44*** (.14) 
5 1.08 (.23) 19.89*** (.19) 
6 .82 (.22) 7.86*** (.17) 
7 .97 (.23) 5.92*** (.15) 
‘‘Granger causality’’ models with 4–7-year time lag specifications. Note: Models have identical specifications as those 
reported in Table 3, except with the different numbers of lags. Adjusted R2 in parentheses. * p < .05. *** p < .001.more accepted papers and thus more production. In a period of normal science in a sub-debate, it 
will be hard to challenge the paradigm with a non-consensual argument. 
The findings also suggest that the humanities follow the Kuhnian cycle of a low production 
low consensus revolution followed by a high production high consensus normal science, 
followed by another revolution. Sociologists of science and others have long noted that the social 
sciences and the humanities have lower consensus at any given time than the natural sciences do 
(Cole, 1983; Whitley, 1984; Collins, 1994). At least in the case of bioethics, it appears that the 
revolutions are even less consensual than in the natural sciences, and the periods of normal 
science less consensual as well. However, the same expansion and contraction cycle – albeit at a 
lower level of consensus – does seem to be occurring. 
That Kuhn’s pattern holds in the social sciences and the humanities will be less controversial 
than Kuhn’s original application of his ideas to the natural sciences, because before Kuhn, people 
thought that science progressed through the linear aggregation of knowledge. The social sciences 
and the humanities have never been committed to this as a rhetorical ideal. Moreover, Kuhn was 
originally controversial for the implication of this theory that sociological patterns at least partially 
accounted for the knowledge that was accepted to be ‘‘true.’’ Again, this type of naive epistemology 
of science has never been as influential in the social sciences and humanities. Certainly in bioethics 
no one contends that what they write is independent of human or sociological influences. 
Let us take an example of this process from the bioethical sub-debate of human genetic 
engineering, which has been closely examined (Evans, 2002). In the early days, there was a great 
debate about what the goals of human genetic engineering should even be. Should the point be to 
eradicate disease, improve the human species, serve God, maximize human freedom, or some 
other end? This highly nonconsensual debate went on for a number of years, and eventually 
consensus was formed – or, in Evans’ account, imposed – and the published literature on human 
genetic engineering increased markedly. Like the Kuhnian account, this later voluminous 
literature was a ‘‘mopping up’’ exercise (Kuhn, 1970:24), working out the details instead of the 
big questions. These data suggest that the gatekeepers of academic publishing prefer the sub- 
debates engaged in ‘‘mopping up’’ activity within a consensual paradigm than those sub-debates 
that are trying to create a new paradigm. 
To the extent these findings are generalizable to writings in the humanities, we would expect a 
similar pattern. To consider a hypothetical example from literature, after Derridian literary 
deconstruction become institutionalized in the U.S. (Lamont, 1987), that is, after a consensus was 
formed in literary criticism, then deconstructive literary studies could proliferate in earnest. If the 
findings of this paper are generalizable, it is not the case that a large amount of academic 
publishing led to the consensus on Derrida’s method (H4), or that more production lead to less 
consensus on the method (H3), or that the institutionalization of the method then led to a decline 
in academic production. 
5.1. What does this mean for bioethics as a field 
On a more specific and pragmatic level, the self-conception of the bioethics field as an 
institution in the public sphere where more published debate leads to consensus formation (H4) is 
incorrect. Why does it fail at this self-appointed task? I cannot say with these data, but we can 
speculate as to the cause. In the highly theoretical literature on the public sphere, when 
deliberation does not lead to consensus one suspects the imposition of a nondemocratic power. 
(Consider, for example, the Habermasian assumption that the state and market are infiltrating the 
public sphere, using the power of these institutions to bias consensus formation.) In other 
14 J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21research, I have shown that if one compares two academics whose texts were equally used by 
other academics, the one who is a member of the academic elite will have more influence on the 
future debate and the one who is not an elite will not have less influence (Evans, 2005). Therefore, 
perhaps consensus is not formed by the amount of deliberation among all academics, but is set by 
the elites. This suggests, at minimum, that if bioethics is an institution in the public sphere it does 
not operate in the idealized way the Habermas and others would predict. 
While the field of bioethics does not operate as an ideal-type institution in the public sphere, it 
also does not display the more troubling features that other institutions in the public sphere are 
accused of. For example, it is not the case that an increase in the amount of academic debate leads 
to a decrease in consensus (H3). This phenomenon represents one of the greatest fears of liberal 
theorists – that increasing debate makes resolution of societal problems less likely. Indeed, social 
scientists have claimed that this process is operative in the abortion debate, where an increasing 
amount of debate in the public sphere results in the polarization of citizens into two camps that 
lack a common language between them in order to even discuss a substantive consensus (Hunter, 
1991). Without the ability to discuss the problem, the argument continues, we may slip into a civil 
war (Hunter, 1994). 
It is also not the case that an increase in the degree of consensus leads to a decrease in the 
amount of academic debate (H2). The effect of this would be that as an issue is becoming ripe for 
substantive consensus due to the formation of discursive consensus, people stop debating it, 
resulting in the issue not being presented as opinion to the state. The logical extension of this 
relationship is the more commonly stated fear: issues of decreasing consensus become the most 
debated – and are thus presented to the state as unresolvable problems. The sin quo non of this 
fear is the abortion debate. 
However, it is the case that an increase in consensus leads to an increase in the amount of 
academic debate (H1). This hypothesis is not devastating for theories of the public sphere, but 
offers an unusual twist. Instead of bioethics being a location of consensus formation, it is a 
location where increasing consensus amplifies the debate. Thus, issues with which there is a 
growing consensus are increasingly discussed, raising the possibility that the problem will be 
perceived as a real problem by the state. Put positively, if this is correct, then bioethics amplifies 
issues with which there is discursive consensus and thus the possibility of substantive consensus. 
Only issues ready for substantive consensus are broadly debated. Put negatively, academia is 
inherently conservative in that only issues of growing consensus are debated broadly enough to 
get the attention of the state. 
Acknowledgments 
For comments on earlier drafts I would like to thank Robin Rogers-Dillon, Mark Schlesinger, 
Mary Olson, Mike Moody, Ann Mische, Brian Steensland, Aziza Khazzoom, Steve Clayman, 
Dan Olson, the reviewers and editors of Poetics, and audiences at ASA and the sociology 
departments at Princeton and Rutgers. 
Appendix A. Keyword data9 
Since the analyses above use a data set that will be unfamiliar to readers, more detail is 
warranted on two issues: how texts were selected to be in the database and how the keywords are 
J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 15 
9 This methodological description is taken from Evans (2002:205–213).assigned to texts. Bioethicsline is a database devoted to the ‘‘literature on bioethical issues,’’ 
explicitly considered a ‘‘cross-disciplinary field’’ whose literature appears in ‘‘widely scattered 
sources’’ (Walters and Kahn, 1995:3). It ‘‘seeks to be comprehensive for all English-Language 
materials... which discuss ethical aspects of the topics and subtopics’’ it searches for (Walters, 
1975:X) including but not limited to books, chapters of books, and journal articles. In 1995 as 
well as in 1975 (the year the bibliographers began looking for texts) the staff of the bibliography 
had 38 indexes in their ‘‘cross-disciplinary monitoring system’’ such as the Humanities Index, 
Library Journal, Philosopher’s Index, Sociological Abstracts, and many more (Walters and Kahn, 
1995). 
Texts for the database are selected in the following manner. First, the librarians directly 
monitor 99 journals and newspapers for items that might be included. The reference tools and 
databases are searched for possible items, and books that are purchased by the Georgetown 
University library are also scanned for possible inclusion. Not surprisingly, as journals and 
indexes come and go over time, their use by the Bioethicsline staff changes. The staff monitors 
twice as many journals now than they did in the very first year (Walters, 1975), but the 
distribution by professional interest (e.g. science, theology, etc.) remains similar except for an 
increase in the numbers of journals now exclusively dedicated to bioethics. 
An interview with the Senior Bibliographer of the database reveals that they have changed 
the rules of inclusion somewhat over the years, but these changes will not bias my analyses 
because these changes are consistent across all sub-debates. Bioethicsline has slowly but 
steadily increased the number of items included in the database in each year. For example, 
there are 1185 items listed in the 1974 database and 3518 listed in the 1994 database. Of these 
texts, 71% are journal articles, 7% are books, 13% chapters from books, 5% newspaper 
articles, and the remainder audiovisuals, court documents, unpublished declarations and the 
like. Of the journal articles, approximately 3% are letters to the editor and 3% editorials. All 
but the journal articles, books and chapters from books were removed from the analysis. 
Moreover, the secular increase in the number of texts on all sub-debates is accounted for in the 
analyses. 
The final step in the selection process is that all possible items for inclusion are brought to the 
Senior Biographer who uses the ‘‘rule of thumb’’ for inclusion that the item must pertain to 
‘‘health care’’ or ‘‘biomedical research’’ and contain at least 50% of its pages discussing issues of 
‘‘ethics or related broadly defined public policy implications.’’ This standard of inclusion has not 
changed over the years. 
After an item has been selected for inclusion in the Bioethicsline database by the senior 
bibliographer, it is given to one of four professional bibliographers (who have degrees in 
information science) who assign keywords to the item after ‘‘reading’’ it. The quotations 
around ‘‘reading’’ point to the issue of the precision of measurement of the keywords. When 
assigning keywords, the bibliographers actually do read the entire item if it is anything but a 
book and then assign keywords. For books, according to the senior bibliographer, ‘‘read is too 
strong a word.’’ They read the introduction and conclusion in the normal sense of the term and 
then scan the rest. The bibliographers work in pairs with one checking the work of the other in 
an informal form of inter-coder reliability. Although this is, according to the senior 
bibliographer, much more in-depth analysis then most other bibliographic databases, it does 
suggest a slight loss of precision that is inevitable while using this type of data. Any 
measurement error will not be correlated with any of the other variables in the analysis 
because this method was used equally for all items and has been used since the inception of 
the database. 
16 J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21Appendix B. The first 100 keywords (alphabetical order), in Bioethicsline database 
Aborted fetuses Anonymous testing Burns 
Abortion Artificial feeding Cadavers 
Abortion on demand Artificial insemination Cancer 
Accountability Artificial organs Capital punishment 
Active euthanasia Assisted suicide Capitalism 
Administrators Attitudes Caring 
Adolescents Attitudes to death Carriers 
Adoption Audiovisual aids Case studies 
Adults Autonomy Casuistry 
Advance directives Autopsies Central nervous system disease 
Advertising Beginning of life Cesarean section 
Advisory committees Behavior control Child abuse 
Age Behavior disorders Child birth 
Aged Behavioral genetics Children 
Aggression Behavioral research Chorionic villi sampling 
Aids Beneficence Christian ethics 
Aids serodiagnosis Bioethical issues Christian scientists 
Alcohol abuse Bioethics Chromosome abnormalities 
Aliens Biological warfare Chronically ill 
Allied health personnel Biology Clergy 
Allowing to die Biomedical research Clinical ethics 
Alternative therapies Biomedical technologies Clinical ethics Committees 
Alternatives Blacks Cloning 
Altruism Blood donation Codes of ethics 
American Indians Blood specimen collection Coercion 
Amniocentesis Blood transfusions Common good 
Ancient history Body parts and fluids Communicable diseases 
Anencephaly Bone marrow Communication 
Anesthesia Brain Communism 
Animal care committees Brain death Community services 
Animal experimentation Brain pathology Comparative studies 
Animal organs Breast cancer Compassion 
Animal rights Buddhist ethics Compensation 
Animal testing alternatives 
Note: The remaining keywords are listed, with definitions, in the Bioethics Information Retrieval Project (1995). Some 
keywords that may seem to fit the definition of a sub-debate were not included as such in the analysis because of either low 
n or because they were not used throughout most of the years. 
Appendix C. Model assumptions 
Pooled time series data offer many challenges to proper estimation that have vexed social 
scientists for many years (Stimson, 1985; Beck and Katz, 1995, 1996; Maddala, 1998; Maddala 
and Kim, 1998). The most common problems are autocorrelation in the error terms, colinearity 
and heterogeneity within the i’s. To cut through this debate, Beck and Katz (1996:30) describe 
two general approaches to addressing the challenges to inference in these data. The first considers 
these problems to be an ‘‘intrinsic part of the model’’ and the second considers the problems to be 
a ‘‘nuisance.’’ 
The ‘‘intrinsic part of the model’’ advocates argue for placing variables in the model that 
control for the underlying error processes and then estimating the equations using OLS. 
Researchers using the ‘‘nuisance’’ approach assume that since neither heteroskedasticity across 
J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 17the i’s or autocorrelation affect the parameter estimates, only the efficiency of the standard 
errors, the proper place for correcting complicated error processes is in a generalized least 
squares (GLS) model. GLS estimators obtain their results by first estimating the model using 
OLS to obtain the residuals, from which are estimated parameters of the degree of 
autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity, which are in turn used to transform the data. The model 
is then fitted to these transformed data. While Beck and Katz argue that while in most situations 
the GLS methods introduce more problems then they are worth, they remain common methods 
in sociology and political science for pooled time series data. Given the lack of agreement in this 
area, many sociologists seem to pick either the ‘‘intrinsic part of the model’’ or ‘‘nuisance’’ 
approach based on how well the required specifications of the model fit their theoretical 
concerns or data limitations (Huber and Stephens, 2000:331). I will follow this tradition and, 
because of the parameterization requirements of the Granger test, like political scientists using 
vector autoregression (Freeman et al., 1989), I will follow the ‘‘intrinsic part of the model’’ 
approach. 
As in most pooled time series data, the level values had strong autocorrelation in the errors and 
the panels, considered separately, were nonstationary. The first step taken was to lessen this 
autocorrelation by taking the first difference of the variables and then dividing the difference by 
the previous value to obtain the percentage change from the previous period. Taking first 
differences is not only a common method to reduce autocorrelation, but substantively I am not so 
much interested in the raw amount of knowledge production or amount of consensus, but rather in 
whether there has been an increase or decrease in either of them. 
The Granger method is an extreme version of the ‘‘intrinsic part of the model’’ approach, 
given that it requires including, in my case, between four and seven lags of the dependent 
variable as independent variables. This models any remaining autocorrelation that would 
exist, even at much higher orders than the AR(1) process typically assumed by most 
researchers. Since my method has determined that I will use the ‘‘intrinsic part of the model’’ 
approach, I continued in this approach by explicitly modeling the other challenges to 
estimation. Heteroskedasticity in the i’s was removed through a fixed effect model, with 
dummy variables for each i. 
The time trend was accounted for through also fixing the years (t’s) with dummies, resulting in 
a ‘‘fixed time and group effect’’ version of the least squares dummy variable model (Greene, 
1997:621). Finally, the amount (not percentage change) of the consensus score in year t  1 was 
included in the models predicting the percentage change in consensus (and the amount of 
production in year t  1 was included in the models predicting percentage change in amount of 
production) to correct for a common assumption in these designs that initial levels strongly 
influence percentage changes. For example, a 50% increase in the production in a sub-debate 
requires less social force when the amount of production is quite low (perhaps only 50 texts in a 
debate), than a 50% increase in production when the amount of production is already quite high 
(requiring perhaps 500 additional texts in a debate).10 The Granger models were tested for any 
remaining auto-correlated error using the Breusch–Godfrey Lagrange multiplier test (Maddala, 
1998:206). No significant serial correlation was found. There are also no significant colinearity 
problems in these data. 
18 J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 
10 For example, nations with low initial levels of welfare effort have much greater percent changes in percentage effort 
(Hicks and Misra, 1993:690). The logic is that it is easier to go from 10 to 20 than from 100 to 200. While a significant 
predictor, excluding the variable did not affect the substantive results in any of the models.References 
Abbott, Andrew, 2001. Chaos of Disciplines. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL. 
Beck, Nathaniel, Katz, Jonathan N., 1995. What to do (and not to do) with time-series cross-section data. American 
Political Science Review 89 (3), 634–647. 
Beck, Nathaniel, Katz, Jonathan N., 1996. Nuisance vs. substance: specifying and estimating time-series-cross-section 
models. Political Analysis 6, 1–36. 
Beyer, Janice M., Chanove, Roland G., Fox, William B., 1995. The review process and the fates of manuscripts submitted 
to AMJ. Academy of Management Journal 38 (5), 1219–1260. 
Bioethics Information Retrieval Project, 1995. Bioethics Thesaurus. Kennedy Institute of Ethics, Georgetown University, 
Washington, DC. 
Callon, Michel, Law, John, Rip, Arie, 1986. Mapping the Dynamics of Science and Technology: Sociology of Science in 
the Real World. Macmillan Press, London. 
Camic, Charles, Wilson, Franklin D., 2001. A dialogue about ASR: the editorial team talks. American Sociological 
Review 66, v–ix. 
Campanario, Juan Miguel, 1998. Peer review for journals as it stands today: Part 1. Science Communication 19 (3), 181– 
211. 
Cole, Stephen, 1983. The hierarchy of the sciences? American Journal of Sociology 89 (1), 111–139. 
Collins, Randall, 1994. Why the social sciences won’t become high-consensus, rapid-discovery science. Sociological 
Forum 9 (2), 155–177. 
Collins, Randall, 1998. The Sociology of Philosophies. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Courtial, Jean-Pierre, Law, John, 1989. A co-word analysis of artificial intelligence. Social Studies of Science 19, 301– 
311. 
de Soysa, Indra, Oneal, John R., 1999. Boon or bane? Reassessing the productivity of foreign direct investment. American 
Sociological Review 64, 766–782. 
DiMaggio, Paul J., Anheier, Helmut K., 1990. The sociology of nonprofit organizations and sectors. Annual Review of 
Sociology 16, 137–159. 
Edwards III, George C., Wood, B. Dan, 1999. Who influences whom? The President, Congress, and the media. American 
Political Science Review 93 (2), 327–344. 
England, Paula, 1994. Questions, answers and thanks: editor’s comment. American Sociological Review 59 (1). 
Evans, John H., 2002. Playing God? Human genetic engineering and the rationalization of public bioethical debate. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL. 
Evans, John H., 2005. Stratification in knowledge production: Author prestige and the influence of an American academic 
debate. Poetics 33, 111–133. 
Freeman, John R., 1983. Granger causality and the times series analysis of political relationships. American Journal of 
Political Science 27 (2), 327–358. 
Freeman, John R., Williams, John T., Lin, Tse-min, 1989. Vector autoregression and the study of politics. American 
Journal of Political Science 33 (4), 842–877. 
Fuchs, Stephan, 1992. The Professional Quest for Truth: A Social Theory of Science and Knowledge. State University of 
New York Press, Albany, NY. 
Granato, Jim, Krause, George A., 2000. Information diffusion within the electorate: the asymmetric transmission of 
political-economic information. Electoral Studies 19, 519–537. 
Granger, C.W.J., 1969. Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-spectral methods. Econometrica 
37 (3), 424–438. 
Greenberg, Joseph H., 1956. The measurement of linguistic diversity. Language 32, 109–115. 
Greene, William H., 1997. Econometric Analysis. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
Gujarati, Damadoar N., 1988. Basic Econometrics. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. 
Hargens, Lowell L., 1988. Scholarly consensus and journal rejection rates. American Sociological Review 53, 139–151. 
Hargens, Lowell L., 2000. Using the literature: reference networks and the structure of scholarship. American Socio- 
logical Review 65 (6), 846–865. 
Hicks, Alexander M., 1994. Introduction to pooling. In: Janoski, T., Hicks, A.M. (Eds.), The Comparative Political 
Economy of the Welfare State. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, pp. 169–188. 
Hicks, Alexander, Misra, Joya, 1993. Political resources and the growth of welfare in affluent capitalist democracies, 
1960–1982. American Journal of Sociology 99 (3), 668–710. 
Hilgartner, Stephen, Bosk, Charles L., 1988. The rise and fall of social problems: a public arenas model. American Journal 
of Sociology 94 (1), 53–78. 
J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 19Huber, Evelyne, Stephens, John D., 2000. Partisan governance, women’s employment, and the social democratic service 
state. American Sociological Review 65, 323–342. 
Hunter, James D., 1991. Culture Wars. Basic, New York. 
Hunter, James D., 1994. Before the Shooting Begins: Searching for Democracy in America’s Culture War. Free Press, 
New York. 
Jonsen, Albert R., 1998. The Birth of Bioethics. Oxford University Press, New York, NY. 
Judge, George G., Hill, R. Carter, Griffiths, William E., Lutkepohl, Helmut, Lee, Tsoung-Chao, 1988. Introduction to the 
Theory and Practice of Econometrics. John Wiley and Sons, New York, NY. 
Kinsella, David, 1994. Conflict in context: arms transfers and the Third World rivalries during the Cold War. American 
Journal of Political Science 38 (3), 557–581. 
Kuhn, Thomas S., 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL. 
Lamont, Michele, 1987. How to become a dominant French philosopher: the case of Jacques Derrida. American Journal of 
Sociology 93 (3), 584–622. 
Lamont, Michele, 2000. Meaning-making in cultural sociology: broadening our agenda. Contemporary Sociology 29, 
602–607. 
Law, J., Bauin, S., Courtial, J.-P., Whittaker, J., 1988. Policy and the mapping of scientific change: the co-word analysis of 
research into environmental acidification. Scientometrics 14 (3–4), 251–264. 
Lieberson, Stanley, 1964. An extension of Greenberg’s linguistic diversity measures. Language 40, 526–531. 
Maddala, G.S., 1998. Recent developments in dynamic econometric modeling: a personal viewpoint. Political Analysis 7, 
59–87. 
Maddala, G.S., Kim, In-Moo, 1998. Unit Roots, Cointegration, and Structural Change. Cambridge University Press, New 
York, NY. 
Minkoff, Debra C., 1997. Producing social capital: national social movements and civil society. American Behavioral 
Scientist 40 (5), 606–619. 
Mohr, John, 1998. Measuring meaning structures. Annual Review of Sociology 24, 345–370. 
Moreno, Jonathan D., 1995. Deciding Together: Bioethics and Moral Consensus. Oxford University Press, New York. 
Mullins, Nicholas C., 1973. Theories and Theory Groups in Contemporary American Sociology. Harper and Row, New 
York, NY. 
Parsons, Paul, 1987. Getting Published: The Acquisition Process at University Presses. University of Tennessee Press, 
Knoxville, TN. 
Pindyck, Robert S., Rubinfeld, Daniel L., 1991. Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts. McGraw-Hill, New York, 
NY. 
Powell, Walter, 1985. Getting into Print: The Decision Making Process in Scholarly Publishing. University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago, IL. 
Price, Derek, de Solla, J., 1970. Citation measures of hard science, soft science, technology and nonscience. In: Nelson, 
C.E., Pollock, D.K. (Eds.), Communication Among Scientists and Engineers. Heath Lexington Books, Lexington, 
MA, pp. 3–22. 
Reuveny, Reuveny, Kang, Heejoon, 1996. International trade, political conflict/cooperation, and Granger causality. 
American Journal of Political Science 40 (3), 943–970. 
Roberts, Carl W., 2000. A conceptual framework for quantitative text analysis. Quality and Quantity 34, 259–274. 
Sims, Christopher A., 1980. Macroeconomics and reality. Econometrica 48 (1), 1–48. 
Stimson, James A., 1985. Regression in time and space: a statistical essay. American Journal of Political Science 29 (4), 
914–947. 
Taagepera, Rein, Ray, James Lee, 1977. A generalized index of concentration. Sociological Methods and Research 5 (3), 
367–386. 
Taylor, Charles, 1995. Liberal politics and the public sphere. In: Etzioni, A. (Ed.), The New Communitarian Thinking. 
University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, pp. 183–217. 
Turner, Stephen, Turner, Jonathan, 1990. The Impossible Science: An Institutional Analysis of American Sociology. Sage 
Publications, Newbury Park, CA. 
U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment. 1993. Biomedical Ethics in U.S. Public Policy-Background Paper. 
GPO, Washington, DC. 
Voas, David, Olson, Daniel V.A., Crockett, Alasdair, 2002. Religious pluralism and participation: why previous research 
is wrong. American Sociological Review 67 (2), 212–230. 
Walters, LeRoy, 1975. Bibliography of Bioethics. Gale Research Company, Detroit, MI. 
Walters, LeRoy, 1986. The ethics of human gene therapy. Nature 320, 225–227. 
Walters, LeRoy, Kahn, Tamar Joy, 1995. Bibliography of Bioethics. Gale Research Company, Detroit, MI. 
20 J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21Whitley, Richard, 1984. The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences. Oxford University Press, New York, 
NY. 
Whittaker, John, 1989. Creativity and conformity in science: titles, keywords and co-word analysis. Social Studies of 
Science 19, 473–496. 
Wood, B.Dan, Peake, Jeffrey S., 1998. The dynamics of foreign policy agenda setting. American Political Science Review 
92 (1), 173–184. 
Wuthnow, Robert, 1994. Producing the Sacred: An Essay on Public Religion. University of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL. 
John H. Evans is an Associate Professor of sociology at the University of California, San Diego. He is the author of 
Playing God? Human Genetic Engineering and the Rationalization of Public Bioethical Debate (2002, University of 
Chicago Press) and coeditor (with Robert Wuthnow) of The Quiet Hand of God: Faith-Based Activism and the Public Role 
of Mainline Protestantism (2002, University of California Press). He has also published a number of articles on opinion 
polarization in the U.S. over abortion, homosexuality and related issues. His research focuses on the sociology of religion, 
culture, knowledge, science and, in particular, bioethics. 
J.H. Evans / Poetics 35 (2007) 1–21 21